A SENTIMENTAL LOVE STORY
(FROM THE MEMOIRS OF A DREAMER)
… Or was his destiny from the start
To be but just one moment
Near your heart? …
– Ivan Turgenev
THE FIRST NIGHT

It was a wonderful night, the kind of night, dear reader, which is only
possible when we are young. The sky was so starry, it was such a bright sky
that looking at it you could not help but ask yourself: is it really possible for
bad-tempered and capricious people to live under such a sky? That is also a
young person’s question, dear reader, a very young person’s question, but
may the Lord ask it of your heart more often! … Speaking of capricious and
sundry bad-tempered gentlemen, I could not help but recall my own
commendable conduct throughout the whole day. From early morning an
astonishing melancholy had started to torment me. It suddenly seemed that
I, so alone, was being abandoned by everyone – that everyone was
deserting me. Well, of course, anyone is entitled to ask: who is ‘everyone’?
Because I’ve been living in Petersburg eight years now and I’ve hardly been
able to make a single acquaintance. But what do I need acquaintances for?
I’m acquainted with all of Petersburg as it is; that’s why it seemed to me

that everyone was abandoning me when all of Petersburg suddenly up and
left for their dachas. I was terrified of being left alone, and for three whole
days I wandered about the city in a state of deep melancholy, not
understanding in the least what was happening to me. No matter whether I
went to Nevsky Prospekt, or the park, or wandered along the embankment –
there wasn’t a single person of those whom I have been accustomed to meet
for a year now in the same place, at a certain time. Of course, they don’t
know me, but I know them. I know them intimately; I have practically
learned their faces by heart – and I admire them when they are cheerful, and
I’m crestfallen when they grow sad. I almost struck up a friendship with a
certain little old man, whom I meet every blessed day, at a certain hour on
the Fontanka. His face is so dignified and thoughtful; he’s always
whispering under his breath and gesticulating with his left hand, while in
his right hand he holds a long gnarled walking-stick with a golden knob.
He’s even noticed me and shows a cordial concern for me. Should it happen
that I’m not at the same place on the Fontanka at a certain hour, I’m
positive that he would be crestfallen. That’s why we sometimes almost greet
each other, particularly when we’re both in a good mood. The other day,
when we had not seen each other for two whole days and met on the third
day, we almost reached for our hats, but, thank goodness, we came to our
senses in time, lowered our hands and passed each other by in sympathy. I
also have houses that are my acquaintances. As I walk, it’s as if each one I
come to runs out into the street in front of me, looks out at me with its
windows wide open and almost says: ‘Hello, how do you do? And I, thank
God, am well, but in May they’re going to add a floor to me.’ Or: ‘How do
you do? And I’m having some repairs done tomorrow.’ Or: ‘I almost burned
down and I was so scared’, and so forth. I have favourites among them,
some are intimate friends; one of them intends to be treated by an architect
this summer. I’ll make it a point to drop by every day so that, God forbid,
they don’t kill it in the process! … But I will never forget what happened to
a certain very pretty, light-pink little house. It was such a sweet little stone
house; it looked at me so cordially, and so haughtily at its ungainly
neighbours, that my heart would rejoice when I chanced to walk past.

Suddenly, last week, I was walking down the street and upon turning to
look at my friend – I heard a plaintive cry: ‘But they’re going to paint me
yellow!’ The scoundrels! Barbarians! They spared nothing: neither the
columns, nor the cornices, and my friend had turned as yellow as a canary. I
almost had an attack of jaundice myself, and to this day I do not have the
strength to see my poor disfigured friend who was painted the colour of the
Celestial Empire.
So now you understand, reader, how I am acquainted with all of
Petersburg.
I have already said that for three whole days I was tormented with
anxiety until I guessed the reason for it. And on the street I was in a bad
way (this one’s gone, that one’s gone, where’s so-and-so got to?) – and I
wasn’t myself at home either. For two evenings I tried to put a finger on
what it was I found wanting in my room. Why was I so uncomfortable
staying there? And with bewilderment I examined my green, sooty walls,
and the ceiling from which hung a cobweb that Matryona had been
cultivating with such resounding success; I looked over all my furniture,
examined every chair, wondering if that was the problem (because I’m not
myself if even one chair isn’t in the same place as it was the day before); I
looked out the window, but it was all in vain … I didn’t feel any better. I
even took it into my head to summon Matryona and give her there and then
a fatherly reprimand for the cobweb and for her slovenliness in general; but
she merely looked at me in amazement and walked away without a word in
response, so that the cobweb hangs there safe and sound to this day. It was
only this morning that I finally guessed what the matter was! Oh! Why,
they’re all making off to their dachas and leaving me behind! Forgive the
trivial style, but I’m not up to lofty turns of speech … because, you see,
everybody in Petersburg had either moved or is moving to their dacha;
because after hiring a cab, every venerable gentleman of a solid appearance
was immediately transformed before my eyes into a venerable father of a
family, who after his daily official duties sets off without luggage to the
bosom of his family, at the dacha; because every passer-by now has a quite
special air about him, which all but says to every person he meets:

‘Gentlemen, I’m only here in passing, but in two hours I’m leaving for my
dacha.’ If a window opens, upon which slender fingers as white as sugar
had just drummed, and out leans the head of a pretty girl, who calls to a
pedlar with jugs of flowers – I immediately, there and then, imagine that
these flowers are being bought not simply so as to take pleasure in the
spring and flowers in a stuffy city apartment, but because everybody is
moving to their dacha and they’ll be taking the flowers with them.
Moreover, I had already made such strides in my new, special sort of
discovery that I could already unerringly identify on the basis of appearance
alone where their dacha was located. The residents of Kamenny and
Aptekarsky islands or the Peterhof Road were distinguished by the studied
elegance of their movements, their foppish summer suits and the handsome
carriages that brought them to the city. The inhabitants of Pargolovo and
further out at first glance ‘inspired’ one with their prudence and
respectability; the visitor to Krestovsky Island was distinguished by his
unruffled, cheerful air. Whether I managed to run into a long procession of
carters holding the reins as they lazily walked alongside their carts, loaded
with whole mountains of furniture of every description – tables, chairs,
couches both Turkish and non-Turkish – and other household goods and
chattels, on which, on top of everything, frequently would be sitting at the
very summit of the load, the wizened cook, keeping watch over her master’s
goods as the apple of her eye; whether I looked at the boats, heavily laden
with household utensils, as they glided down the Neva or Fontanka to
Chernaya River or the islands – the carts and boats increased tenfold, a
hundredfold before my very eyes, it seemed as though everything had up
and left, that whole caravans had moved to the dacha; it seemed that all of
Petersburg threatened to turn into a desert, so that in the end I became
ashamed, hurt and sad: I had absolutely nowhere to go and no reason to go
to a dacha. I was ready to leave with every cart, to drive off with every
gentleman of venerable appearance who was hiring a cabbie, but no one,
absolutely no one invited me; it was as if I indeed was a stranger to them!
I had been walking a lot and for a long time, and I had already
completely succeeded, as was my wont, in forgetting where I was, when I

suddenly found myself at the city gates. I cheered up in an instant, and
stepped to the other side of the barrier, walked between the sown fields and
the meadows, oblivious of any fatigue, but sensing with all my being that
some burden was being lifted from my soul. All the passers-by looked at me
so cordially that we practically bowed to one another; everybody was so
happy about something, every last one was smoking a cigar. And I was
happy as I had never been before. It was as if I had suddenly found myself
in Italy – nature had so strongly affected me, a semi-invalid city dweller
who had almost died of suffocation within the city’s walls.
There is something inexplicably touching in our Petersburg nature, when
with the advent of spring she suddenly displays all her might, all the powers
granted her by heaven, when she bursts into leaves, dresses herself up and
decks herself out in colourful flowers … Somehow I can’t help but be
reminded of that weak and sickly girl, at whom you sometimes look with
pity, sometimes with a compassionate love, and sometimes you simply do
not notice her, but then suddenly, for a moment, she somehow,
unexpectedly, becomes inexplicably, wonderfully beautiful, and you,
startled and intoxicated, unwittingly ask yourself: What power caused those
sad, thoughtful eyes to shine with such fire? What summoned the blood to
those pale, sunken cheeks? What has suffused those tender features of her
face with passion? Why does that breast heave so? What was it that so
suddenly summoned strength, life and beauty to the poor girl’s face that it
began to shine with such a smile, came to life with such a sparkling,
effervescent laugh? You look around, you search for someone, you hazard a
guess … But the moment passes and perhaps tomorrow you will once again
meet the same thoughtful and distracted gaze as before, the same pale face,
the same submissive and timid movements, and even repentance, even
traces of some sort of deadening melancholy and annoyance at the shortlived exhilaration … And you regret that the momentary beauty faded so
quickly, so irretrievably, that it flashed before you so deceptively and in
vain – you regret this because there was not time for you even to fall in love
with her …

But nevertheless my night was better than my day! Here’s what
happened:
I arrived back in the city very late, and it had already struck ten o’clock
as I approached my apartment. My path ran along the embankment of the
canal, where at that hour you will not find a living soul. True, I live in a
very remote part of the city. I was walking and singing, because when I am
happy I am sure to hum something to myself, like every other happy man
who has neither friends nor good acquaintances and who in a joyful
moment has nobody with whom he can share his joy. Suddenly the most
unexpected adventure happened to me.
Somewhat to the side, leaning against the railing of the canal, stood a
woman. With her elbows resting on the railing, she seemed to be looking
very attentively at the canal’s turbid water. She was wearing a very pretty
yellow hat and a bewitching black mantilla. ‘She’s a young girl, she just has
to be a brunette,’ I thought. It seems she had not heard my steps; she didn’t
even stir when I walked past, with bated breath, and with my heart beating
violently. ‘Strange!’ I thought, ‘she must be completely absorbed by
something’, and suddenly I stopped, rooted to the ground. I had heard a
muffled sob. Yes! I hadn’t been deceived: the girl was crying and a minute
later there was another whimper and then another. My God! My heart sank.
And no matter how great my timidness with women, this was hardly the
time! … I turned around, took a step in her direction and would certainly
have uttered the word ‘Madam’, but for the fact that I knew that this
exclamation had already been uttered a thousand times in all our Russian
society novels. That was the only thing that stopped me. But while I was
searching for a word, the girl came to her senses, glanced back, recollected
where she was, cast her eyes down and slipped past me along the
embankment. I set off after her at once, but when she realized this, she quit
the embankment, crossed the street and set out walking down the pavement.
My heart was fluttering, like a captured little bird. Suddenly a certain
incident came to my aid.
On the sidewalk across the street, not far from my unknown girl, there
suddenly appeared a gentleman in evening dress, a man with a solid number

of years behind him, but whose gait was anything but solid. He walked,
reeling, and carefully leaning against the wall. The girl meanwhile walked
as straight as an arrow, hurriedly and timidly, as girls generally do when
they don’t want someone to offer to see them home at night, and of course,
the teetering gentleman would never have caught up with her if my good
fortune had not given him the idea of looking to unnatural methods.
Suddenly, without saying a word to anyone, my gentleman darts off and
flies as fast as his legs will carry him; and running, he catches up with my
unknown girl. She was moving along like the wind, but the staggering
gentleman was overtaking her, he had overtaken her, the girl cried out – and
… I thank my good fortune for my excellent knotty walking-stick, which
just happened to be in my right hand on this occasion. In an instant I found
myself on the sidewalk across the street; in an instant the uninvited
gentleman understood what was what, took into account my
incontrovertible reasoning, fell silent and dropped behind, and only when
we were already quite far away did he reproach me in rather energetic
terms. But his words scarcely reached us.
‘Give me your hand,’ I said to my unknown girl, ‘and he won’t dare
bother us anymore.’
In silence she gave me her hand, which was still trembling from
nervousness and fright. Oh, unbidden gentleman! How grateful I was to you
at that moment! I cast a cursory glance at her: she was very pretty and a
brunette – I had guessed right; on her black eyelashes still shone the tears of
her recent fright or former sorrow – I don’t know which. But on her lips a
smile already sparkled. She also cast a furtive glance at me, blushed and
looked down.
‘Now then, you see, why did you drive me away? If I’d been there,
nothing would have happened …’
‘But I didn’t know you: I thought that you too …’
‘But do you really know me now?’
‘A little bit. Now then, for example, why are you trembling?’
‘Oh, you guessed right from the very first!’ I answered, delighted that my
girl was clever: that is never a bad thing where beauty is concerned. ‘Yes,

you guessed from the very first glance the sort of person you’re dealing
with. Yes, it’s true, it’s true, I’m timid with women, I’m nervous, I won’t
deny it – no less than you were a moment ago when that gentleman
frightened you … I’m frightened now. It’s like a dream, but even in my
dreams I never guessed that I would ever talk with a woman.’
‘What? Really? …’
‘Yes, if my hand is trembling, then it’s because such a pretty small hand
like yours has never clasped it before. I’ve grown quite unused to women;
that is, I never became used to them; you see, I’m alone … I don’t even
know how to talk to them. Even now I don’t know whether I’ve said
something stupid to you. Tell me frankly; I should tell you that I don’t take
offence easily …’
‘No, nothing, nothing; on the contrary. And since you’re already asking
me to be candid, then I will tell you that women like such timidity; and if
you want to know more, then I like it as well, and I won’t send you away
until we reach my house.’
‘You’ll make it so,’ I began, gasping with delight, ‘that at once I’ll stop
being my timid self, and then – farewell, all my methods! …’
‘Methods? What sort of methods, for what? Now that’s not very nice.’
‘Guilty, I won’t do it anymore, it was a slip of the tongue; but how do
you expect me at a moment like this to have no desire …’
‘To be liked, is that it?’
‘Well, yes; yes, for God’s sake, be kind. Consider who I am! You see, I’m
already twenty-six years old, but I don’t ever see anyone. So then, how can
I speak well, cleverly and to the point? It will be to your advantage if
everything comes out in the open … I don’t know how to keep quiet when
my heart is speaking inside me. Well, it doesn’t matter … Believe it or not,
not a single woman, ever, ever! No acquaintances at all! And all I dream of
every day is that at long last I will finally meet someone. Oh, if only you
knew how many times I’ve fallen in love like that! …’
‘But how, with whom? …’
‘Why with nobody, with an ideal, with the one I see in my dreams. I
create entire love stories in my dreams. Oh, you don’t know me! It’s true, of

course, I couldn’t help meeting two or three women, but what sort of
women were they? They were all landladies or something like that. But I’ll
make you laugh, when I tell you that several times I have thought of
striking up a conversation just like that, without ceremony, with some
aristocratic lady on the street, when she is alone, it goes without saying; to
speak, of course, timidly, respectfully, deferentially, ardently; to say that I
am perishing all alone, so that she wouldn’t drive me away, that I don’t
have the means to get to know any woman; to suggest to her that a woman
is duty-bound not to spurn the timid entreaty of such an unfortunate man as
I. That in the end all that I’m asking her for is merely to say a few brotherly
words to me, with sympathy, not to drive me away at the very first moment,
to take me at my word, to listen to what I have to say, to laugh at me if she
likes, to give me hope, to say a few words to me, just a few words, even if
we never meet again afterwards! … You’re laughing … But then that’s why
I’m telling you …’
‘Don’t be annoyed; I’m laughing at the fact that you are your own worst
enemy, and if you had tried, perhaps you might have succeeded, even
though it was all taking place on the street; the simpler, the better … Not a
single kind-hearted woman, provided she wasn’t silly or particularly angry
about something at that moment, could have brought herself to send you
away without those few words that you pleaded for so timidly … But what
am I saying! Of course, she would have taken you for a madman. You see, I
was judging by myself. But I know a lot about how people on this earth
live!’
‘Oh, thank you!’ I cried out, ‘you don’t know what you’ve done for me
today!’
‘Very well, very well! But tell me, how did you recognize me to be the
sort of woman, with whom … well, whom you considered worthy … of
attention and friendship … in a word, not a landlady, as you put it. Why did
you make up your mind to approach me?’
‘Why? Why? But you were alone, that gentleman was too brazen, it’s
night now: you must agree that it was my duty …’

‘No, no, even earlier, there, on the other side. You wanted to approach me
then, didn’t you?’
‘There, on the other side? But I truly don’t know how to answer; I’m
afraid … Do you know, today I was happy; I was walking, singing; I’d been
on the outskirts of the city; I’d never experienced such happy moments
before. You … it seemed to me, perhaps … Well, forgive me for reminding
you: it seemed to me that you were crying, and I … I couldn’t bear to hear it
… it made my heart ache … Oh, my God! Surely I might feel pangs of
anguish for you? Surely it was not a sin to experience brotherly compassion
for you! … Forgive me, I said compassion … Well, yes, in a word, could I
really have offended you by impulsively taking it into my head to approach
you? …’
‘Stop, enough, don’t speak …’ the girl said, having cast her eyes
downward and squeezing my hand. ‘I’m the one who’s guilty for bringing it
up; but I’m glad that I wasn’t mistaken about you … But here, I’m already
home; I need to go that way, down the lane, it’s only a stone’s throw away
… Goodbye, thank you …’
‘But is it possible, is it really possible that we shall never see each other
again? … Is it possible it will end like this?’
‘There, you see,’ the girl said, laughing, ‘at first you wanted just two
words, and now … However, I won’t say anything … Perhaps we’ll meet
…’
‘I’ll come here tomorrow,’ I said. ‘Oh, forgive me, I’m already making
demands …’
‘Yes, you’re impatient … you are practically demanding …’
‘Listen, listen!’ I interrupted her. ‘Forgive me if I again say something
not quite … But here it is: I can’t help coming here tomorrow. I’m a
dreamer; I have so little real life that I regard such moments as this one,
now, to be so rare that I can’t help repeating these moments in my dreams. I
will dream of you all night, for an entire week, all year long. I will come
here tomorrow without fail, exactly here, to this very spot, exactly at this
time, and I’ll be happy as I recall what happened yesterday. This place is
already dear to me. I already have two or three such places in Petersburg.

Once I even shed tears, because of a memory, like you … Who knows,
perhaps ten minutes ago you, too, were crying because of a memory … But
forgive me, I’ve forgotten myself again; perhaps at one time you were
particularly happy here …’
‘Very well,’ the girl said, ‘perhaps I will come here tomorrow, also at ten
o’clock. I see that I can’t forbid you … The fact of the matter is that I have
to be here; don’t think that I’m arranging a meeting with you; I’m warning
you in advance that I need to be here for myself. But, you see … Well, I’ll
tell you frankly: it would be nice if you did come; in the first place, there
might be some more unpleasantness like today, but that’s beside the point
… in a word, I’d simply like to see you … so I could say a few words to
you. Only please don’t think ill of me now. Don’t think that I arrange
meetings so casually … I would have made one, if … But let that be my
secret! Only we must make an agreement in advance …’
‘An agreement! Speak, tell me, tell me all beforehand; I’ll agree to
everything, I’m ready for anything,’ I exclaimed in delight, ‘I’ll answer for
myself – I will be obedient, respectful … you know me …’
‘It’s precisely because I do know you that I’m inviting you to come
tomorrow,’ the girl said, laughing. ‘I know you completely. But see that you
come on the following condition: first (only be so kind as to do what I ask –
you see, I’m speaking candidly), don’t fall in love with me … That’s
impossible, I assure you. I’m prepared to be your friend, here’s my hand …
But falling in love is impossible, I beg you!’
‘I swear,’ I cried, as I clasped her hand …
‘Come, come, don’t swear, you see, I know that you’re capable of flaring
up like gunpowder. Don’t condemn me for speaking like this. If you only
knew … I also have no one to whom I can say a word, from whom I can ask
advice. Of course, the street is not the place to look for advisers, but you’re
an exception. I know you so well, as if we had been friends for twenty years
… You won’t betray me, will you? …’
‘You’ll see … Only I don’t know how I’m going to survive the next
twenty-four hours.’

‘Sleep well; good night – and remember that I have already put myself
into your hands. But your exclamation just now put it so nicely: must one
really account for every feeling, even for brotherly sympathy! Do you
know, that was put so nicely that I suddenly thought I might confide in you
…’
‘By all means, but about what? What’s it about?’
‘Until tomorrow. Let it be a secret in the meantime. It will be better for
you that way; although from a distance it will look like a love story. Maybe
I’ll tell you tomorrow and maybe not … I’ll talk with you a bit more first,
we’ll get to know each other better …’
‘Oh, and tomorrow I’ll tell you everything about myself! But what is
this? It’s as though a miracle were happening to me … My God, where am
I? Well, tell me, aren’t you glad that you didn’t get angry as another woman
would have done and drive me away from the very beginning? Two minutes
and you have made me happy forever. Yes! happy; who knows, perhaps you
have reconciled me with myself, resolved my doubts … Perhaps such
moments overwhelm me … Well, I’ll tell you everything tomorrow, you’ll
learn everything about me, everything …’
‘Very well, I accept; and you’ll start first …’
‘Agreed.’
‘Goodbye!’
‘Goodbye!’
And we parted. I walked all night long; I couldn’t make up my mind to
go home. I was so happy … until tomorrow!


THE SECOND NIGHT

‘Well, so you survived!’ she said to me, laughing and taking hold of both
my hands.
‘I’ve been here for two hours already; you have no idea what I’ve been
through today!’
‘I know, I know … But now to the matter at hand. Do you know why
I’ve come? Not to talk nonsense like yesterday, you know. Here’s why: we
need to act more sensibly from now on. I thought about all this for a long
time last night.’
‘But how, how are we to be more sensible? For my part, I’m ready; but
really nothing more sensible has ever happened to me in all my life than
what is happening now.’
‘Is that so? First of all, please don’t squeeze my hands like that; and
second, I want to tell you that I thought about you long and hard today.’
‘Well, and what conclusion did you reach?’
‘Conclusion? I concluded that we must begin all over again, because
today I came to the conclusion that I don’t know you at all, that yesterday I
acted like a child, like a little girl, and it goes without saying that it turned
out that my kind heart was to blame for it all; that is, I praised myself,
which is how it always ends when we start examining our actions. And
that’s why, in order to correct this mistake, I’ve decided to find out
everything I can about you in the most detailed manner. But since there’s no
one from whom I can find out anything about you, you must tell me
everything yourself, everything that there is to know. Well, what sort of
person are you? Quickly – begin, tell me the story of your life.’
‘The story of my life!’ I cried out, frightened. ‘My story! But who told
you that I have a story to tell? I don’t have a story …’
‘But how have you lived if there’s no story?’ she interrupted, smiling.

‘Absolutely without stories of any kind! I lived, as they say, on my own,
that is, absolutely alone – alone, completely alone – do you understand
what it means to be alone?’
‘But what do you mean by alone? Do you mean you never see anyone?’
‘Oh, no, of course I see people, but nevertheless I am alone.’
‘But can it really be that you don’t talk to anyone?’
‘Strictly speaking, to nobody.’
‘So who are you, then, explain yourself! Wait, I’ll hazard a guess: you
probably have a grandmother, like I do. She’s blind, and for as long as I can
remember she has never let me go anywhere, so that I’ve practically
forgotten how to talk. A couple of years ago I got into a lot of mischief and
she saw that she couldn’t control me, so she called me over and pinned my
dress to hers with a safety pin – and ever since we sit like that for days on
end; she knits a stocking, even though she’s blind; and I sit beside her,
sewing or reading a book to her out loud – it’s such a strange way to live,
and I’ve been pinned to her like that now for two years already …’
‘Oh, my God, how dreadful! But no, I don’t have a grandmother like
that.’
‘But if you don’t, then how is it that you stay at home? …’
‘Listen, do you want to know what sort of person I am?’
‘Well, yes, yes!’
‘In the strict sense of the word?’
‘In the very strictest sense of the word!’
‘Well, then, I’m a type.’
‘Type, type! What sort of type?’ the girl cried out, laughing as if she had
not had a chance to laugh for a whole year. ‘You’re certainly very amusing
company! Look: there’s a bench here; let’s sit down! No one walks by here,
no one will hear us, and – you can begin your story! Because you won’t
succeed in persuading me otherwise, you do have a story, only you’re
concealing it. First of all, what is a type?’
‘A type? A type is an eccentric, a ridiculous person!’ I answered, and
burst out laughing myself in response to her childish laughter. ‘He’s a real
character. Listen: do you know what a dreamer is?’

‘A dreamer? Excuse me, but of course I do! I’m a dreamer myself! What
doesn’t enter my head sometimes when I’m sitting beside my grandmother.
Well, then you begin to dream, and you become so lost in your thoughts that
before you know it you’re marrying a Chinese prince … But sometimes
dreaming is a good thing! But then, God only knows! Particularly if there’s
something to think about without dreaming,’ the girl added, quite serious
now.
‘Excellent! If you’ve been married to a Chinese emperor, that means
you’ll understand me perfectly then. Well, listen … But excuse me; I don’t
even know your name.’
‘At last! You certainly took your time about it!’
‘Oh, my goodness! It never entered my head – I was so happy as it was
…’
‘My name is Nastenka.’
‘Nastenka! And that’s all?’
‘That’s all! Is that really not enough for you? What an insatiable fellow
you are!’
‘Not enough? On the contrary, it’s a great deal, a very great deal indeed,
Nastenka – you’re a kind girl if you’re Nastenka to me right away!’
‘So, there you are!’
‘So then, Nastenka, listen to what a ridiculous story this turns out to be.’
I sat down next to her, assumed a pedantically serious pose and began as
though I were reading something that had been written down.
‘There are, Nastenka, in case you don’t know, there are rather strange
little corners in Petersburg. It’s as if the same sun that shines for all of
Petersburg’s people doesn’t even peek into these places, but there is another
different, new sun, as if specially ordered for these corners, and it shines on
everything with a different, special light. In these corners, dear Nastenka,
it’s as if a completely different kind of life is lived, one that doesn’t
resemble that which seethes around us, but the kind that might exist in a
faraway kingdom, and not among us in our serious, oh so serious times.
And it is this life which is a mixture of something purely fantastic, fervently

ideal, and at the same time (alas, Nastenka) dully prosaic and ordinary, not
to say – incredibly vulgar.’
‘Ugh! Good heavens! What an introduction! Whatever will I hear next?’
‘You’ll hear, Nastenka (it seems that I shall never tire of calling you
Nastenka), you’ll hear that in these corners live strange people – dreamers.
A dreamer – if you require a precise definition – is not a man, but some sort
of sexless being, you see. For the most part, he makes his home somewhere
in an inaccessible corner, as if he were hiding there even from the light of
day, and once he goes into hiding, he sticks to his corner, like a snail, or at
any rate, he very much resembles in this regard that entertaining animal,
both animal and house at the same time, which is called a tortoise. What do
you think, why does he so love his own four walls, which are certain to be
painted green, covered with soot, wretched and unforgivably grimy from
tobacco smoke? Why does this ridiculous gentleman, when one of his few
acquaintances comes to visit him (and he ends up losing all his
acquaintances), why does this ridiculous person greet him with such
embarrassment, such a changed countenance and such confusion, as though
he had just committed a crime within his four walls, as though he had been
forging counterfeit notes or some little poems to be sent to a journal with an
anonymous letter in which it is revealed that a true poet has died and that
his friend considers it his sacred duty to publish his ditties? Why, tell me,
Nastenka, does the conversation between these two interlocutors never get
going? Why does neither laughter nor some lively remark fly from the
tongue of the completely unexpected and perplexed friend, who in different
circumstances likes to laugh a great deal, as well as engage in lively banter,
and conversations about the fair sex, and other cheerful subjects? And why,
finally, does this friend, probably a recent acquaintance making his first
visit – because in this case there will not be a second and the friend won’t
come again – why does this friend become so embarrassed, so stiff, all his
wit notwithstanding (if indeed he has any) as he looks at the crestfallen face
of his host, who in turn has already managed to become completely
flustered and utterly muddled after gigantic but futile efforts to smooth over
and keep the conversation going, to show his knowledge of the ways of the

world, to talk, too, about the fair sex and, at the very least, by such
deference to please the poor person who has turned up at the wrong place
and mistakenly come to visit him? Why, finally, does the guest suddenly
grab his hat and quickly leave, having remembered all of a sudden some
very urgent business, which never existed, and somehow or other extricate
his hand from the warm handshake of his host, who in every way possible
was trying to show his regret and set right that which had been lost? Why
does the departing friend chortle as he goes out the door, there and then
vowing never to visit this crackpot, even though this crackpot is truly a
most excellent fellow; at the same time why can he not deny his
imagination the passing fancy of comparing, if only remotely, the
physiognomy of his recent interlocutor throughout the entire time of their
meeting with the look of an unhappy little kitten, treacherously captured by
children who have mauled, frightened and tormented it in every way
possible, and which has finally taken refuge from them under a chair, in the
dark, and there for an entire hour at its leisure bristles, hisses and washes its
aggrieved face with both paws, and for a long time afterwards looks with
enmity at nature and life and even at the scraps from his master’s dinner
which the compassionate housekeeper had saved for him?’
‘Listen,’ interrupted Nastenka, who all this time had been listening to me
in amazement, with her eyes and little mouth wide open. ‘Listen: I
absolutely do not know why all this happened and why you are putting such
ridiculous questions to me; but what I do know for certain is that all these
adventures certainly happened to you, word for word.’
‘Without a doubt,’ I answered with the most serious expression.
‘Well, as there’s no doubt, then continue,’ Nastenka answered, ‘because I
very much want to know how it all ends.’
‘You want to know, Nastenka, what our hero was doing in his corner – or
rather, what I was doing, for the hero of this whole affair is myself – my
own humble person; you want to know why I became so alarmed and was
flustered for an entire day by the unexpected visit of a friend? You want to
know why I was so startled, why I blushed so when the door to my room

opened, why I didn’t know how to receive my guest and why I floundered
so shamefully under the weight of my own hospitality?’
‘Well, yes, yes!’ Nastenka answered. ‘That’s the whole point. Listen: you
tell it splendidly, but could you tell it somehow less splendidly? Otherwise,
you talk as though you were reading from a book.’
‘Nastenka!’ I answered in a dignified and stern voice, scarcely holding
back my laughter, ‘dear Nastenka, I know that I am telling it splendidly; I
plead guilty – but I don’t know how to tell it differently. Now, dear
Nastenka, now I’m like King Solomon’s genie trapped in an earthenware
urn for a thousand years, under seven seals, and from which these seven
seals were at last removed. Now, dear Nastenka, when we have come
together again after such a lengthy separation – because I have known you
for a long time, Nastenka, because I have long been searching for someone,
and that is a sign that I was looking precisely for you and that we were fated
to meet now – now in my head thousands of valves have opened and I must
set loose this river of words, or I will choke to death. So then, I ask that you
not interrupt me, Nastenka, but listen obediently and dutifully; otherwise –
I’ll keep my silence.’
‘No-no-no! By no means! Speak! I won’t say another word.’
‘To continue: there is, my friend Nastenka, in my day one hour that I like
exceedingly. It is the hour when almost all business, duties and
engagements are coming to an end, and everybody is hurrying home to
dinner, to lie down and rest, and there and then, as they’re making their way
home, they concoct other cheerful schemes pertaining to the evening, the
night and all the rest of their free time. At this hour our hero, too – for allow
me, Nastenka, to tell the story in the third person, because it’s terribly
embarrassing to tell all this in the first person – so then, at this hour our
hero, too, who has also not been idle, walks along behind the others. But a
strange sense of pleasure plays on his pale, somewhat rumpled face. With
feeling he looks at the sunset, which slowly fades away in the cold
Petersburg sky. When I say he looks, I’m lying: he doesn’t look, but he
contemplates it somehow without thinking, as if he were tired or
preoccupied at the same time with some other more interesting object, so

that he can only cursorily, almost involuntarily, spare time for everything
around him. He is pleased, because he has finished until tomorrow with the
business that he finds irksome, and he is as happy as a schoolboy who has
been dismissed from the classroom to his favourite games and mischief.
Look at him in profile, Nastenka: you’ll see at once that the joyful feeling
fortunately has already begun to have an effect on his weak nerves and
morbidly excited imagination. He’s fallen deep in thought about something
… Do you think it’s about dinner? About this evening? What is he looking
at like that? At that respectable-looking gentleman who bowed so
picturesquely to the lady riding past him in a glittering carriage drawn by
those frisky horses? No, Nastenka, what does he care now about such
trifles? His own particular life has already made him rich; he somehow
suddenly became rich, and not in vain did the farewell ray of the dying sun
so gaily sparkle before him and call forth an entire swarm of impressions
from his warmed heart. Now he scarcely notices the path on which even the
most petty trifle would have struck him earlier. Now the “Goddess of
Fantasy” (if you have read Zhukovsky, dear Nastenka) has already spun her
golden warp and begun to fashion before his eyes patterns of a fantastic,
marvellous life – and who knows, perhaps with her whimsical hand she has
transported him to the seventh crystal heaven from the excellent granite
sidewalk on which he was walking home. Try stopping him now, and ask
him suddenly where he’s standing now, along which streets has he walked.
He probably will remember nothing, neither where he was walking, nor
where he is now standing, and after blushing with vexation he will certainly
tell some lie in order to save face. That’s why he was so taken aback, almost
crying out and looking all around in alarm, when a very respectable old
woman who had lost her way politely stopped him in the middle of the
sidewalk and began to ask him for directions. Frowning with vexation, he
carries on walking, scarcely noticing that he has caused more than one
passer-by to smile and turn round to look at him as he walked away, and
that some little girl, as she timidly made way for him, began to laugh
loudly, as she looked wide-eyed at his broad, contemplative smile and
gesturing hands. But the same fantasy caught up in its playful flight the old

woman, and the curious passers-by, and the laughing girl, and the peasants
who were spending their night right there on the barges that crowded the
Fontanka (let’s suppose that at this moment our hero was walking along
there), and mischievously wove everybody and everything into its canvas,
like a fly in a spider’s web, and with this new acquisition the eccentric had
entered his comforting lair, sat down to dinner, finished his dinner long ago
and only came to when the pensive and eternally doleful Matryona who
waits on him had already cleared everything from the table and given him
his pipe; he came to and recalled with surprise that he had already had his
dinner, but had taken no notice whatsoever how that was accomplished. It
had grown dark in the room; his heart feels empty and forlorn; the whole
kingdom of dream has collapsed around him, collapsed without a trace,
without a sound or fuss – it flew past like a vision, and he himself doesn’t
remember what he was dreaming about. But some vague sensation faintly
disturbs his breast and causes it to ache, some new desire seductively tickles
and excites his fancy and imperceptibly summons a whole swarm of new
phantoms. Quiet reigns in the little room; solitude and indolence caress the
imagination; it faintly catches fire, it is faintly brought to the boil, like the
water in the coffeepot of old Matryona, who placidly potters about next
door in the kitchen, as she makes her cook’s coffee. Now it’s already gently
breaking through in bursts; now the book, picked up without purpose and at
random, is already falling from my dreamer’s hand, without his even
getting to the third page. His imagination is once again incited, excited, and
suddenly again a new world, a new enchanting life with its glistening vistas
flashes before him. A new dream is new happiness! A new dose of
exquisite, voluptuous poison! Oh, what does real life have to offer him! In
his misdirected view, you and I, Nastenka, live so idly, slowly, sluggishly;
in his view, we are all so dissatisfied with our fate, so worn down by our
life! And really, as a matter of fact, look how everything at first glance
among us is cold, gloomy, indeed wrathful … “The poor things,” my
dreamer thinks. And it’s no wonder that he should think so! Look at these
magical phantoms that so enchantingly, so whimsically, so boundlessly and
broadly take shape before him in such a magical, animated picture, in which

the most important figure in the foreground, of course, is he himself, our
dreamer, his own dear person. Look, what diverse adventures, what an
endless swarm of ecstatic daydreams. You will ask, perhaps, what does he
dream about? Why ask that? About everything … about the role of the poet,
who at first goes unrecognized, but is later crowned with success; about
friendship with Hoffmann; St Bartholomew’s Night, Diana Vernon, the
heroic role of Ivan Vasilyevich in the taking of Kazan, Clara Mowbray,
Effie Deans, the Council of the Prelates and Huss before them, the rising of
the dead in Robert (do you remember the music? It smells of the
graveyard!), Minna and Brenda, the battle of Beryozina, the reading of a
poem at Countess V.D.’s, Danton, Cleopatra ei suoi amanti, the little house
in Kolomna; his own little corner, with a dear creature at his side who
listens on a winter’s evening, with her little mouth and eyes open, just as
you’re listening to me now, my little angel … No, Nastenka, what need has
he, this voluptuous sluggard, of this life that you and I desire so? He thinks
that this is a poor, pitiful life, not anticipating that perhaps some day the sad
hour will strike for him as well, when for a single day of this pitiful life he
would give up all of his fantastic years, and give them up not for joy, or for
happiness, and without wishing to choose in this hour of sadness,
repentance and boundless sorrow. But this terrible time has yet to come – he
desires nothing, because he is above desire, because he has everything,
because he is sated, because he himself is the artist of his life and he creates
it for himself every hour to suit his latest whim. And, you see, this fairytale, fantastic world is created so easily, so naturally! As though all this
were truly not a phantom! Indeed, he is prepared to believe at certain
moments that all of this life is not the excitement of feelings, not a mirage,
not a delusion of the imagination, but that it is, indeed, authentic, genuine,
real! Why, tell me, Nastenka, oh why, at such moments does one’s breathing
become laboured? Why, by what magic, by what mysterious caprice does
the pulse quicken, do tears gush forth from the dreamer’s eyes, his pale,
moist cheeks burn as his entire being fills with such irresistible delight?
Why do whole sleepless nights pass by like a single instant in inexhaustible
merriment and happiness, and when the dawn’s rosy ray shines through the

windows and the daybreak illumines the gloomy room with its dubious
fantastic light, such as we have in Petersburg, why does our dreamer,
exhausted and weary, throw himself on his bed and fall asleep, his
tormented and overwhelmed spirit trembling with ecstasy, while his heart
aches with a sweet agony? Yes, Nastenka, you deceive yourself, and
unwittingly and dispassionately believe that it is a genuine, true passion that
disturbs his soul, you unwittingly believe that there is something alive and
tangible in his incorporeal daydreams! But, you see, it’s all a delusion –
take, for example, the love that has pierced his breast with all its
inexhaustible joy, with all its wearisome torments … Just look at him and
you’ll be convinced! Would you believe, when you look at him, dear
Nastenka, that indeed he has never known her whom he loves so in his
frenzied daydreams? Can it be that he has only seen her in certain
captivating phantoms and only dreamed this passion? Can it really be that
they have not spent so many years of their lives together hand in hand –
alone, just the two of them, having forsaken the entire world and each
uniting their life, their world, with the life of their friend? Can it really be
that at this late hour, when the time had come to part, she did not lay there,
sobbing and grieving on his breast, not hearing the storm, which was
breaking under the bleak sky, or the wind, which plucked and carried away
the tears from her black lashes? Can this really all have been a dream – this
garden, cheerless, desolate and wild, with paths overgrown with moss,
secluded, and gloomy, where they so often would walk together, where they
hoped, grieved, loved, loved each other for such a long time, “so long and
tenderly”? And this strange, ancestral home, in which she had lived for such
a long time, secluded and melancholy, with her sullen, old husband, always
silent and peevish, who frightened them, while they, timid as children,
dolefully and timorously concealed their love from each other? How they
suffered, how fearful they were, and how innocent and pure was their love
and how (it goes without saying, Nastenka) malicious people were! And,
my God, was it really not she he met later, far from the shores of their
homeland, under an alien sky, in the torrid South, in the marvellous Eternal
City, in the brilliance of a ball, to the thunder of music, in a palazzo (it

absolutely must be a palazzo), drowned in a sea of lights, on this balcony,
wreathed with myrtle and roses, where she, upon recognizing him, so
hastily took off her mask and whispered: “I am free”, and trembling, threw
herself into his arms, and with a cry of rapture, they embraced, and in an
instant they forgot sorrow, separation, all their torments, the gloomy house,
the old man, the dismal garden in their distant homeland, the bench on
which, with one last passionate kiss, she had torn herself away from his
arms, numb from torments of despair? … Oh, you must agree, Nastenka,
that you would be startled, feel embarrassed and blush like a schoolboy who
had just crammed into his pocket an apple stolen from the neighbour’s
orchard, if some lanky, hearty lad, a merry fellow and a joker, your
uninvited friend, opened your door and shouted out, as if nothing had
happened: “And I, my dear fellow, just got back from Pavlovsk!” My
goodness! The old count has died, ineffable happiness is close at hand – and
here people are coming from Pavlovsk!’
I pathetically fell silent, upon concluding my pathetic exclamations. I
remember that I wanted terribly somehow to force myself to burst out
laughing, because I already sensed that a hostile little demon had begun to
stir inside me, that I was about to choke, that my chin was beginning to
quiver and that my eyes were watering more and more … I expected
Nastenka, who was listening to me with her intelligent eyes wide open, to
burst into her childish, irrepressibly merry laughter, and was already
regretting that I had gone too far, that I had been wrong to tell her about
what had long seethed in my heart, about which I could talk as though I
were reading a written text, because I had long ago passed sentence on
myself and now could not resist reading it, to confess, without expecting
that I should be understood; but to my surprise, she kept silent; after waiting
a little bit she gently pressed my hand and with a timid concern asked:
‘Can you really have lived your whole life like that?’
‘My whole life, Nastenka,’ I replied, ‘my whole life and I believe that’s
how I’ll end my days!’
‘No, that’s impossible,’ she said uneasily, ‘it won’t be like that – that
would mean I would likely live out my whole life by Grandmother’s side.

Listen, you do know that it’s bad for you to live like that?’
‘I know, Nastenka, I know!’ I exclaimed, no longer holding my feelings
in check. ‘And now I know more than ever that I’ve wasted all my best
years for nothing! I know this now, and I feel it all the more painfully now
that I see that God himself has sent you, my good angel, to me, in order to
tell me this and prove it to me. As I sit beside you and talk to you now, I’m
terrified even to think about the future, because the future is once again
loneliness, once again this stagnant, useless life; and what will there be for
me to dream about when I have already been so happy in real life beside
you! Oh, bless you, dear girl, for not turning me away from the very first,
for making it possible that I can now say that I have lived at least two
evenings in my life!’
‘Oh, no, no!’ Nastenka cried out, and little tears began to glisten in her
eyes. ‘No, it won’t be like that any more; we won’t part like that! What are
two evenings!’
‘Oh, Nastenka, Nastenka! Do you know you have reconciled me with
myself for a good long time? Do you know that now I will not think so
badly of myself as I sometimes have done? Do you know that now, perhaps,
I will no longer suffer anguish for having committed a crime and sin in my
life, because a life like that is a crime and sin? And don’t think that I have
been exaggerating anything to you, for God’s sake, Nastenka, don’t think
that, because sometimes I am overcome by moments of such anguish, such
anguish … Because at those moments it begins to seem that I will never be
able to begin living a real life; because it already seems that I have lost all
sense, all feeling for the genuine, the real; because, in the end, I curse
myself; because after my fantastic nights I am visited by sobering moments
that are horrible! Meanwhile, you hear all around you how the throng of
humanity thunders and spins in the whirlwind of life; you hear, you see how
people live – they live in reality; you see that life for them is not forbidden,
that their life doesn’t vanish like a dream, like a vision, that their life is
eternally renewing, eternally young, and not a single hour of it resembles
any other; whereas how cheerless and monotonously banal is the timorous
fantasy, the slave of a shadow, of an idea, the slave of the first cloud that

suddenly obscures the sun and fills with anguish the heart of every true
Petersburger, which holds its sun so dear – but what sort of fantasy is there
to be found in anguish! You sense that this inexhaustible fantasy is finally
growing tired, that it is becoming exhausted under constant strain; because,
you see, you are growing into manhood, you are outgrowing your former
ideals: they are being smashed to dust, to bits and pieces; and if there is no
other life, then you must build it from these bits and pieces. But meanwhile
your soul yearns and pleads for something else! And in vain does the
dreamer rake through his old dreams, as if they were ashes, searching in
these ashes for at least some little spark, in order to fan it into flames, and
with this rekindled fire warm his heart, which has grown cold, and resurrect
in himself once again everything that he had held dear, that had touched his
soul, that had made his blood boil, that had brought tears to his eyes and
had so splendidly deceived him! Do you know, Nastenka, how low I have
fallen? Do you know that I’m compelled now to celebrate the anniversary
of my own sensations, the anniversary of that which was formerly so dear,
of that which in essence never took place – because this anniversary is
celebrated in honour of those same foolish, phantom dreams – and to do it
because even those foolish dreams are no more, because I have nothing
with which to replenish them: you see, even dreams need to be replenished!
Do you know that I now like to recall and visit at certain times places where
I was once happy in my own way, I like to fashion my present so that it’s in
harmony with the irrevocable past, and I often wander like a shadow,
without need or purpose, downcast and sad, through the alleys and streets of
Petersburg? And what memories! You recall, for instance, that exactly a
year ago now, exactly at this very same time, at this very same hour, you
wandered along this very sidewalk just as lonely, just as downcast as you
are now! And you recall that your dreams were sad then as well, and even
though it was not better then, nevertheless, you somehow feel that it was
easier, that you lived more comfortably, that there wasn’t this black
brooding that troubles you now; that you didn’t have these pangs of
conscience, these gloomy, dismal pangs that now give you no peace night
or day. And you ask yourself: Where are your dreams? And you shake your

head and say: How quickly do the years fly by! And again you ask yourself:
What have you done with your years? Where have you buried your best
days? Did you live or not? Look, you say to yourself, look how cold the
world is becoming. More years will pass, followed by gloomy solitude, and
then doddering old age will come on a walking-stick, to be followed by
anguish and despondency. Your fantastic world will grow pale, your dreams
will wither, die and scatter like yellow leaves from the trees … Oh,
Nastenka! It will be sad, you know, to be left alone, quite alone, and not
even have something to regret – nothing, absolutely nothing … because all
that I have lost, all this, it was all nothing, a stupid, round zero – it was
merely a dream!’
‘Now, stop trying to make me feel sorry for you!’ Nastenka said, wiping
away a tear which had rolled down from her eye. ‘That’s all over now! The
two of us will be together now; now, no matter what happens to me, we will
never part. Listen. I’m a simple girl, without much education, although my
grandmother did hire a teacher for me; but I truly do understand you,
because everything that you’ve told me just now, I experienced myself
when Grandmother pinned me to her dress. Of course, I couldn’t have told
it so well as you have done; I’m not educated,’ she added timidly, because
she was still feeling some sort of respect for my pathetic speech and my
lofty style, ‘but I’m very happy that you have confided in me so completely.
Now I know you, through and through, I know everything about you. And
do you know what? I want to tell you my story now, all of it, frankly, and
afterwards you’ll give me your advice. You’re a very sensible man; do you
promise to give me your advice?’
‘Ah, Nastenka,’ I replied, ‘although I’ve never been an adviser, much less
a sensible adviser, I see now that it would somehow be very sensible if we
were to always live like this, and we would give each other a lot of sensible
advice! Well, my pretty Nastenka, what advice should I give you? Tell me
frankly; I’m so cheerful, happy, bold and sensible now that I won’t be at a
loss for words.’
‘No, no,’ Nastenka interrupted, laughing, ‘it’s not only sensible advice
that I need; I need advice that is heartfelt and brotherly, as though you had

loved me all your life!’
‘All right, Nastenka, all right!’ I cried out in delight, ‘and if I’d already
loved you for twenty years, I still couldn’t have loved you more than I do
right now!’
‘Give me your hand!’ Nastenka said.
‘Here it is!’ I answered, as I gave her my hand.
‘And so, let’s begin my story!’


NASTENKA’S STORY

‘Half of my story you already know, that is, you know that I have an old
grandmother …’
‘If the other half is as short as this one …’ I interrupted, laughing.
‘Keep quiet and listen. First of all, a condition: you’re not to interrupt
me, or else I’ll very likely get muddled. Now, listen quietly.
‘I have an old grandmother. I found myself with her when I was still a
very little girl, because my mother and father had died. It’s fair to suppose
that Grandmother had been richer at one time, because even now she recalls
better days. It was she who taught me French and then later hired a teacher
for me. When I was fifteen years old (I’m seventeen now), the lessons
stopped. And it was at this time that I got into a lot of mischief; but I won’t
tell you what I did; it’s enough to say that my misdeed was minor. But
Grandmother called me one morning and said that since she was blind she
couldn’t keep an eye on me, so she took a pin and fastened my dress to hers,
and then she said that we would sit like that for the rest of our lives if, of
course, I didn’t behave better. In a word, at first it was quite impossible to
get away: I did all my work, reading and studying right beside
Grandmother. I once tried to trick her and talked Fyokla into sitting in my
place. Fyokla is our maid, she’s deaf. Fyokla sat down instead of me;
Grandmother had fallen asleep in her armchair at the time, and I set off for
my girlfriend’s not far away. Well, it ended badly. Grandmother woke up
when I was away and asked about something, thinking that I was still sitting
quietly in my place. Fyokla could see that Grandmother was asking for
something, but she couldn’t hear what it was, she thought and thought about
what she should do, undid the pin, and took to her heels …’
Here Nastenka paused and laughed. I started to laugh with her. She
stopped at once.

‘Now listen, don’t you laugh at my grandmother. I’m laughing, because
it’s funny … What can I do when Grandmother really is like that, but I love
her all the same. Well, that time I certainly got what for: I was sat down in
my place at once and wasn’t allowed to budge an inch.
‘Oh, yes, I also forgot to tell you that we have, that is, Grandmother has
her own house, that is, a tiny little house, with only three windows, all made
of wood and as old as Grandmother herself; and there’s an attic upstairs;
and so a new lodger moved into our attic …’
‘Consequently, there must have been an old lodger?’ I noted in passing.
‘Well, of course there was,’ Nastenka replied, ‘and one who knew how to
keep quiet better than you do. True, he could barely move his tongue. He
was a little old man, withered, mute, blind, lame, so that it finally became
impossible for him to live in this world, and he died; then we needed a new
lodger, because we can’t live without a lodger: that together with
Grandmother’s pension is practically our entire income. The new lodger, as
luck would have it, was a young man, not from around here, from out of
town. Since he didn’t try to bargain with her, Grandmother took him in, but
later she asked: “So, Nastenka, is our lodger young or not?” I didn’t want to
lie: “Now,” I say, “Grandmother, it’s not as though he’s very young, but
then he’s not an old man.” “Well, and is he good-looking?” Grandmother
asks.
‘Again, I don’t wish to lie. “Yes,” I say, “he’s good-looking,
Grandmother!” And Grandmother says: “Oh, what a nuisance, what a
nuisance! I’m saying this, Granddaughter, so that you don’t get carried
away by him. Oh, what times we live in! Who would have thought it
possible, such a piddling lodger – and he has to be good-looking as well:
things were different in the old days!”
‘It’s always the old days with Grandmother! She was younger in the old
days, and the sun was warmer in the old days, and cream didn’t go sour so
quickly in the old days – it’s always the old days! And so I sit and keep
quiet, and think to myself: why is Grandmother filling my head with ideas
and asking whether our lodger is handsome or whether he’s young? But that
was all there was to it; I just gave it a thought and there and then began

counting my stitches again – I was knitting stockings – and then completely
forgot about it.
‘And then one morning the lodger came to ask about his room being
wallpapered as he had been promised. One thing led to another,
Grandmother is talkative, you see, and she says: “Go to my bedroom,
Nastenka, and bring me my accounts.” I immediately jumped up, blushing,
I don’t know why, and I’d forgotten that I was sitting there pinned to
Grandmother; I didn’t quietly unpin myself so that the lodger wouldn’t see,
no – I dashed off so that Grandmother’s chair went flying. When I saw that
the lodger now knew everything about me, I blushed, stood there as if I
were rooted to the ground and burst into tears – I became so ashamed and
miserable at that moment that life didn’t seem worth living! Grandmother
shouts: “Why are you just standing there?” – which made me cry even more
… When the lodger saw this, when he saw that I was embarrassed on
account of him, he took his leave and went away at once!
‘From that moment on I would practically die at the slightest sound in the
entrance hall. There goes the lodger, I’d say to myself, and quietly undo the
pin just in case. Only it was never him, he never came. Two weeks passed;
the lodger sent word through Fyokla that he had a lot of French books and
that they were all good books, suitable for me to read; wouldn’t
Grandmother like me to read them to her, so that we wouldn’t be bored?
Grandmother accepted with gratitude, but she kept asking if the books were
moral or not, because if the books were immoral, then you, Nastenka, she
says, mustn’t read them under any circumstances, you’ll learn bad things.
‘“And what would I learn, Grandmother? What’s written in them?”
‘“Oh!” she says, “they describe how young men lead well-behaved girls
astray; how under the pretence of wanting to marry them, they carry them
off from their parents’ house; how they later abandon these unfortunate girls
to the whims of fate; and how they then perish in the most lamentable
manner. I,” Grandmother says, “have read a lot of books like that and
everything,” she says, “is so wonderfully described that you sit up all night,
quietly reading. So you, Nastenka,” she says, “see that you don’t read them.
What kind of books,” she asks, “has he sent?”

‘“They’re all novels by Walter Scott, Grandmother.”
‘“Novels by Walter Scott! But wait just a minute, there must be some sort
of shenanigans going on here. Take a good look to see if he slipped a little
love note in one of them.”
‘“No, I say, Grandmother, there isn’t a note.”
‘“And look under the binding as well; sometimes they stuff it into the
binding, the rascals! …”
‘“No, Grandmother, there isn’t anything under the binding either.”
‘“Well, what did I tell you!”
‘And so we began to read Walter Scott and in a month or so we had read
almost half. Then he sent us some more and some more. He sent Pushkin; in
the end I couldn’t be without a book and stopped thinking about marrying a
Chinese prince.
‘That’s how things stood when I chanced to meet our lodger on the
staircase. Grandmother had sent me for something. He stopped, I blushed
and he blushed; he laughed though, said hello, asked after Grandmother’s
health and says: “So have you read the books?” I answered: “Yes.” “Which
one,” he asks, “did you like the most?” And I say: “I liked Ivanhoe and
Pushkin best of all.” And that was the end of it that time.
‘A week later I ran into him again on the staircase. This time
Grandmother hadn’t sent me, I had needed to get something for myself. It
was after two, which was when the lodger would come home. “Hello!” he
says. I answer: “Hello!”
‘“Don’t you get bored,” he asks, “sitting with your grandmother all day
long?”
‘As soon as he asked me that, I blushed, I don’t know why; I became
embarrassed, and once again my feelings were hurt, evidently because now
others had begun asking questions about this. I wanted to walk away
without answering, but I didn’t have the strength.
‘“Listen,” he says, “you’re a good girl! Forgive me for talking with you
like this, but I assure you I wish you well more than your grandmother
does. Don’t you have any girlfriends whom you can go and visit?”

‘I say that I don’t have any, that there was one, Mashenka, but that she’s
gone away to Pskov.
‘“Listen,” he says, “would you like to go to the theatre with me?”
‘“To the theatre? But what about Grandmother?”
‘“Well,” he says, “you can go without telling her …”
‘“No,” I say, “I don’t want to deceive Grandmother. Goodbye!”
‘“Well, goodbye,” he says, and he didn’t say another word.
‘Only after dinner he comes to see us; he sat down, talked with
Grandmother for a long time, asked whether she goes out anywhere,
whether she has any friends – and suddenly he says: “I took a box at the
opera today; they’re putting on The Barber of Seville, friends wanted to go
and then cancelled, so I’m left with the tickets.”
‘“The Barber of Seville!” Grandmother exclaimed, “is that the same
Barber they used to put on in the old days?”
‘“Yes,” he says, “it’s the very same Barber,” and he cast a glance at me.
And then I understood everything, blushed and my heart began to thump in
expectation!
‘“But of course I know it!” Grandmother says. “In the old days I even
sang Rosina in amateur theatricals.”
‘“So, would you like to go today?” said the lodger. “My tickets will go to
waste.”
‘“Yes, I suppose we could go,” Grandmother says, “why shouldn’t we
go? After all, my Nastenka has never been to the theatre.”
‘My goodness, what joy! We at once pulled ourselves together, got ready
and set off. Even though Grandmother is blind, she still wanted to hear the
music, and besides she’s a kind old woman: more than anything she wanted
me to enjoy myself; we should never have gone on our own. I won’t tell
you my impressions of The Barber of Seville, except to say that all that
evening our lodger looked at me so nicely, and spoke so nicely that I saw at
once that he had wanted to test me in the morning by proposing that I go
with him alone. Well, what joy! I went to bed so proud, so happy; my heart
was pounding so that I became slightly feverish and I raved on about The
Barber of Seville all night long.

‘I thought that he would stop by more and more often after that – but that
wasn’t the case. He almost stopped coming altogether. And so, he would
drop by once a month, and then only to invite us to the theatre. We went
with him again a couple of times. Only I wasn’t at all happy with this. I saw
that he simply felt sorry for me, because I was kept under Grandmother’s
thumb so, and there wasn’t anything else to it. And then as time went on
something came over me: I couldn’t sit still, and I couldn’t read, and I
couldn’t work; sometimes I would laugh and do something to Grandmother
out of spite, while at other times I would simply cry. In the end, I grew thin
and almost became ill. The opera season was over and the lodger stopped
dropping by altogether; whenever we would meet – always on that same
staircase, it goes without saying – he would bow so silently, so seriously, as
though he didn’t wish to speak, and then walk down all the way to the front
door, while I was still standing halfway up the stairs, as red as a cherry,
because all my blood would rush to my head whenever we met.
‘Now we’re coming to the end. Exactly a year ago, in May, the lodger
comes to us and tells Grandmother that he has finished all his business and
that he must return to Moscow for a year. When I heard this I turned white
and collapsed on to the chair half dead. Grandmother didn’t notice
anything, and after announcing that he was going away, he took his leave
and left.
‘What was I to do? I thought and thought, I became more and more
miserable, and finally I came to a decision. He was to leave the next day,
and I decided that I would bring everything to a conclusion that evening
after Grandmother had gone to bed. And that’s what happened. I gathered
into a bundle all my dresses, as many underclothes as was necessary, and
with the bundle in hand, neither dead nor alive, I set off to our lodger’s
room in the attic. I think I spent an entire hour walking up that staircase.
When I opened his door, he cried out upon seeing me. He thought that I was
a ghost, and rushed to get me some water, because I could scarcely stand on
my own feet. My heart was pounding so that my head ached and my
thinking had become confused. When I came to my senses, I began
straightaway by placing my bundle on his bed, sat down next to it, buried

my face in my hands and let loose floods of tears. He seemed to understand
everything in an instant and stood before me pale, looking at me with such
sadness that it broke my heart.
‘“Listen,” he began, “listen, Nastenka, I can’t do anything; I’m a poor
man; I don’t have anything yet, not even a decent job; how would we live if
I were to marry you?”
‘We talked for a long time, but in the end I worked myself into such a
state that I said I couldn’t live with Grandmother, that I would run away
from her, that I didn’t want to be pinned to her and that if he liked, I would
go with him to Moscow, because I couldn’t live without him. Shame, and
love, and pride spoke in me all at once, and I collapsed on his bed almost in
convulsions. I was so afraid of a refusal!
‘He sat in silence for several minutes, then got up, walked over to me and
took me by the hand.
‘“Listen, my dear, my sweet Nastenka!” he began, also through tears.
“Listen, I swear to you that if ever I am in the position to marry, then you
will certainly be the one to make me happy; I assure you that now only you
alone can make me happy. Listen: I am going to Moscow and will stay there
for exactly one year. I hope to put my affairs in order. When I return, and if
you have not stopped loving me, then I swear to you that we will be happy.
But this is impossible now; I can’t, I don’t even have the right to promise
something. But, I repeat, if this doesn’t happen in a year’s time, then it
certainly will some day; it goes without saying – but only in the event that
you don’t prefer somebody else to me, because I cannot and dare not bind
you by any sort of promise.”
‘That’s what he told me and the next day he went away. We both agreed
not to say a word about this to Grandmother. That was how he wanted it.
Well, now my story is almost finished. Exactly a year has passed. He has
arrived, he has been here already three whole days and, and …’
‘And what?’ I cried out, impatient to hear the end.
‘And he still hasn’t shown himself!’ Nastenka answered, as if
summoning up all her strength. ‘There has been neither hide nor hair of him
…’

Here she stopped, fell silent for a bit, bent her head and suddenly, having
covered her face with her hands, began to sob so hard that it broke my
heart.
I wasn’t at all expecting an ending like that.
‘Nastenka!’ I began in a timid and ingratiating voice, ‘Nastenka! For
goodness’ sake, don’t cry! How do you know? Maybe he hasn’t arrived yet
…’
‘He’s here, he’s here!’ Nastenka rejoined. ‘He’s here, I know it. We made
an agreement back then, on that evening before his departure: when we had
already said everything that I’ve told you, and we had come to an
agreement, we came out here for a stroll, right on this very embankment. It
was ten o’clock; we were sitting on this bench; I had stopped crying, and I
was enjoying listening to him talk … He said that upon his arrival he would
come to us at once and if I didn’t refuse him, then we would tell
Grandmother about everything. Now he’s arrived, I know it, and he hasn’t
come, he hasn’t!’
And once again she broke down in tears.
‘Good heavens! Is there really nothing I can do to ease your sorrow?’ I
cried out, jumping up from the bench in despair. ‘Tell me, Nastenka,
couldn’t I at least go and see him?’
‘Would that really be possible?’ she said, suddenly raising her head.
‘No, of course not, no!’ I said, after giving it some thought. ‘But here’s
what you could do – write a letter.’
‘No, that’s impossible, I couldn’t do that,’ she answered resolutely, but
she had already lowered her head and wasn’t looking at me.
‘How is it that you can’t? Why can’t you?’ I continued, taking up my
idea. ‘But you know, Nastenka, you need a certain kind of letter! There are
letters and then there are letters and … Oh, Nastenka, it’s true! Believe me,
believe me! I wouldn’t give you bad advice. All this can be arranged! It was
you who took the first step – then why can’t you now …’
‘I can’t, I can’t! It would seem that I was forcing myself on him …’
‘Oh, my dear little Nastenka!’ I interrupted, not concealing a smile, ‘not
at all, no; you, of course, have a right to, because he promised you. And

everything tells me that he’s a delicate person, that he conducted himself
properly,’ I continued, becoming more and more enraptured with the logic
of my own arguments and convictions. ‘How did he conduct himself? He
bound himself with a promise. He said that he would not marry anyone but
you, if he does marry; he left you completely free to refuse him even now
… Under such circumstances, you may take the first step, you have the
right, you have the advantage over him, if, for example, you should wish to
release him from his promise …’
‘Listen, how would you write it?’
‘What?’
‘Why, this letter.’
‘I would write it like this: “Dear Sir …”’
‘Is this “Dear Sir” absolutely necessary?’
‘Absolutely! But then again, why should it be? I suppose …’
‘Well, well! Go on!’
‘“Dear Sir! Forgive me for …” But no, we don’t need any forgiveness!
Here the fact itself justifies everything; write simply:
I am writing you. Forgive my impatience; but for a whole year hope alone has made me
happy; am I to blame that I cannot now bear even a day of doubt? Now, when you have
come back, perhaps you have changed your intentions. Then this letter will tell you that I
do not complain, nor do I blame you. I do not blame you that I have no power over your
heart; such, then, is my fate!
You are a noble person. You will not laugh and will not be annoyed at my impatient
lines. Remember that they are written by a poor girl, that she is alone, that she has no one
to teach her or to advise her and that she has never been able to control her heart. But
forgive me that doubt should have crept into my heart for even a single moment. You are
not capable of insulting, even in thought, the one who loved you so and who still loves
you.’

‘Yes, yes! That’s exactly what I was thinking!’ Nastenka cried out, and
joy began to shine in her eyes. ‘Oh, you have resolved my doubts, God
himself has sent you to me! Thank you, thank you!’
‘For what? For God sending me?’ I answered, gazing in delight at her
happy little face.
‘Yes, for that as well.’

‘Oh, Nastenka! You know, we thank some people for merely living at the
same time as we do. I thank you for the fact that I met you, that I will
remember you for all my life!’
‘Well, enough, enough! And now look here, listen closely: we agreed
then that as soon as he arrived, he would immediately let me know, that he
would leave a letter for me at a certain place, with some acquaintances of
mine, good and simple people who know nothing about this; or that if he
couldn’t write me a letter, because you can’t always say everything in a
letter, then the very same day that he arrived he would be here at exactly ten
o’clock, where we arranged to meet. I know that he’s arrived; but it’s now
the third day and there’s been no letter, and he hasn’t come. It’s quite
impossible for me to get away from my grandmother in the morning.
Tomorrow, give my letter to these same good people, about whom I just
told you: they will forward it; and if there’s an answer, then you bring it
yourself in the evening at ten o’clock.’
‘But the letter, the letter! After all, you need to write the letter! So this
will all probably be the day after tomorrow.’
‘The letter …’ Nastenka answered, a bit confused, ‘the letter … but …’
But she didn’t complete her thought. At first she turned her little face
away from me, blushed, like a rose, and suddenly I felt in my hand a letter
that had evidently been written long ago, sealed and all ready to go. Some
familiar, sweet, graceful recollection passed through my mind!
‘R, o-Ro, s, i-si, n, a-na,’ I began.
‘Rosina!’ we both began singing – I, almost embracing her in delight, and
she, having blushed as only she could blush, laughing through her tears,
which trembled like pearls on her black eyelashes.
‘Well, enough, enough! Goodbye now!’ she said in a rush. ‘Here’s the
letter for you, and here’s the address to take it to. Goodbye! Until we meet!
Until tomorrow!’
She firmly clasped both my hands, nodded her head and flew away like
an arrow down the lane. I stood there for a long time, following her with my
eyes.

‘Until tomorrow! Until tomorrow!’ flashed through my head, as she
disappeared from sight.


THE THIRD NIGHT

Today was a sad, rainy day, without a ray of hope, just like my future old
age. I am besieged by such strange thoughts, such dark sensations, such
obscure questions, which still crowd my mind – and somehow I have
neither the strength nor the desire to resolve them. It is not for me to resolve
all this!
Today we will not see each other. Yesterday, when we were saying
goodbye, clouds began to gather in the sky and a mist was rising. I said that
tomorrow the weather would be bad; she didn’t answer, she didn’t want to
say anything that would go contrary to her wishes; for her this day was to
be both bright and clear, and there wasn’t to be a single cloud to darken her
happiness.
‘If it rains, then we won’t see each other!’ she said. ‘I won’t come.’
I thought that she wouldn’t notice the rain today, but she didn’t come.
Yesterday was our third meeting, our third white night …
But how fine joy and happiness make a person! How the heart seethes
with love! It seems that you want to pour out all your heart into another’s
heart, you want everything to be gay, laughter everywhere. And how
infectious is this joy! Yesterday in her words there was such tenderness, so
much heartfelt kindness towards me … How she flattered me, how she
treated me with affection, how she cheered and pampered my heart! Oh,
how much coquetry springs forth from happiness! And I … I took
everything for the genuine article; I thought that she …
But, my goodness! How could I have thought that? How could I have
been so blind, when everything had already been taken by another, when
everything was not mine, when, in the end, even this very tenderness of
hers, her attentions, her love … yes, her love for me – was nothing more
than joy at the impending meeting with someone else, the desire to thrust
her happiness on me? … When he didn’t come, when we waited in vain,

she frowned, lost heart and became frightened. All her movements, all her
words were no longer so light, playful and gay. And, strangely enough, she
doubled her attentions to me as if instinctively wishing to lavish upon me
all that she wished for herself, and that she feared might not come to pass.
My Nastenka was so timid, so afraid, that it seems she understood at last
that I loved her, and she took pity on my poor love. And so it is that when
we are unhappy we more strongly feel the unhappiness of others; feeling is
not shattered, but becomes concentrated …
I had come to her with a full heart, scarcely able to wait for our meeting.
I had no presentiment of how I would feel now, no presentiment it would all
end differently. She was beaming with joy, she was waiting for her answer.
He himself was the answer. He was supposed to come, to come running at
her summons. She came a whole hour earlier than I. At first she shrieked
with laughter at everything, laughed at my every word. I was just about to
speak and fell silent.
‘Do you know why I’m so happy?’ she said, ‘so happy to look at you?
Why I love you so today?’
‘Well?’ I asked, and my heart began to tremble.
‘I love you because you didn’t fall in love with me. Why, someone else in
your place would have started bothering me, pestering me, sighing, falling
ill, but you’re such a dear!’
And then she squeezed my hand so that I almost cried out. She laughed.
‘My goodness! What a friend you are!’ she began a minute later very
seriously. ‘Yes, God himself sent you to me! Well, what would have
happened to me if you had not been with me now? You’re so unselfish! You
love me so! When I’m married, we will be great friends, more than if we
had been brothers. I will love you almost as much as I love him …’
I began to feel somehow terribly sad at that moment; however, something
very much like laughter was beginning to stir in my soul.
‘You’re nervous,’ I said, ‘you’re afraid; you think that he won’t come.’
‘Good heavens!’ she answered, ‘if I were any less happy, I should
probably burst into tears on account of your lack of faith, your reproaches.
However, you’ve given me an idea and a lot to think about; but I’ll think

about it later, and now I’ll confess to you that you spoke the truth! Yes, I’m
somehow not myself; I’m somehow all wrapped up in expectations and
somehow feel everything too lightly. But enough, let’s not talk about
feelings! …’
At that moment steps could be heard, and in the darkness appeared a
passer-by who was walking in our direction. We both began to tremble; she
almost cried out. I let go of her hand and made a gesture as though I wanted
to walk away. But we were both mistaken: it was not he.
‘What are you afraid of? Why did you stop holding my hand?’ she said as
she gave it to me again. ‘Well, what’s the matter? We’ll meet him together. I
want him to see that we love each other.’
‘That we love each other!’ I cried.
‘Oh, Nastenka, Nastenka!’ I thought to myself. ‘How much you’ve said
with that one word. Such a love, Nastenka, at certain moments can make
the heart grow cold and make one miserable. Your hand is cold, mine is as
hot as fire. How blind you are, Nastenka! … Oh, how unbearable is the
happy person at certain moments! But I couldn’t be angry with you! …’
Finally, my heart was overflowing.
‘Listen, Nastenka!’ I cried, ‘do you know what I’ve been through today?’
‘Well, what, what is it? Tell me quickly! Why have you been silent all
this time!’
‘First of all, Nastenka, when I had carried out all your commissions,
delivered the letter, visited your good people, then … then I returned home
and went to bed.’
‘Is that all?’ she interrupted, laughing.
‘Yes, almost all,’ I answered reluctantly, because foolish tears were
already welling up in my eyes. ‘I woke up an hour before our meeting, but
it was as if I hadn’t slept. I don’t know what was wrong with me. I was
coming, so that I could tell you all this, as if time had stopped for me, as if a
certain sensation, a certain feeling were going to remain with me forever
from this time forward, as if a single minute would continue for a whole
eternity and all life would come to a halt for me … When I woke up, it
seemed to me that some sort of musical melody, long familiar, heard

somewhere before, forgotten and sweet, was coming back to me. It seemed
to me that all my life it had been begging to be released from my soul, and
only now …’
‘Ah, my goodness, my goodness!’ Nastenka interrupted. ‘What is all this
about? I don’t understand a single word.’
‘Ah, Nastenka! I wanted somehow to convey this strange impression to
you …’ I began in a plaintive voice, which still harboured hope, albeit a
very remote one.
‘Enough, stop, enough!’ she said, and in a single instant she figured out
everything, the imp!
Suddenly she became somehow unusually talkative, gay and
mischievous. She took me by the hand, laughing, she wanted me to laugh as
well and each word of mine uttered in embarrassment was met with such
ringing, such prolonged laughter … I began to get angry, she had suddenly
started playing the coquette.
‘Listen,’ she began, ‘I’m a bit disappointed, you know, that you didn’t
fall in love with me. Just try and understand human nature after that! But
still and all, Mr Inflexible, you cannot but praise me for being such a simple
girl. I tell you everything, everything, no matter what sort of foolishness
comes into my head.’
‘Listen! That’s eleven o’clock, isn’t it?’ I said, when the measured sound
of the bell began to ring in the distant city tower. She suddenly stopped, left
off laughing and began to count.
‘Yes, eleven,’ she said at last in a timid, hesitant voice.
I at once regretted that I had frightened her, that I had made her count the
hours, and I cursed myself for the fit of spite. I felt sorry for her and I didn’t
know how to atone for my transgression. I began to comfort her, to seek out
reasons for his absence, to advance various arguments, proofs. Nobody
could have been easier to deceive than she was at that moment, and indeed
at such a time anyone would be happy to hear any sort of consolation
whatsoever and is made ever so happy by even the shadow of an excuse.
‘And the whole thing’s ridiculous,’ I began, becoming more and more
excited, and admiring the unusual clarity of my own arguments, ‘and he

couldn’t have come; you’ve misled me and bewitched me, Nastenka, so that
I’ve lost track of the time … Now just think: he’s only just got the letter;
let’s suppose that he can’t come, let’s suppose that he’ll send an answer,
then the letter couldn’t come before tomorrow. I’ll go as soon as it’s light
tomorrow and let you know at once. Consider, finally, that there are a
thousand possibilities: well, he wasn’t home when the letter arrived, and
perhaps he still hasn’t read it. You know, anything might have happened.’
‘Yes, yes!’ Nastenka answered, ‘I didn’t think of that; of course, anything
might have happened,’ she continued in her most compliant voice, in which,
however, one could hear some other remote thought, like an annoying
dissonance. ‘Here’s what you’ll do,’ she continued, ‘you go as early as
possible tomorrow and if you get anything, you’ll let me know at once. You
do know where I live, don’t you?’ And she began to repeat her address for
me.
Then she suddenly became so tender, so timid with me … She seemed to
be listening attentively to what I was saying to her; but when I addressed a
question to her, she remained silent, got confused and turned her head away
from me. I looked her in the eyes – I was right: she was crying.
‘Now, how can you, how can you? Ah, you’re such a child! What
childishness! … Enough!’
She made an attempt to laugh, to calm herself, but her chin was trembling
and her chest was still heaving.
‘I was thinking about you,’ she said to me after a minute’s silence,
‘you’re so kind that I would have to be made of stone not to feel it. Do you
know what just occurred to me? I was comparing the two of you. Why isn’t
he – you? Why isn’t he like you? He’s not as good as you, even though I
love him more than you.’
I didn’t say anything in reply. She seemed to be waiting for me to say
something.
‘Of course, perhaps I don’t fully understand him yet, don’t fully know
him yet. You know, I was always a bit afraid of him; he was always so
serious, he seemed so proud. Of course, I know that he only looks like that,
that there is more tenderness in his heart than there is in mine … I

remember how he looked at me then, when I, you remember, came to him
with my bundle; but all the same I respect him too much, and doesn’t that
mean that we’re not equals?’
‘No, Nastenka, no,’ I answered, ‘that means that you love him more than
anything in the world, and a good deal more than you love yourself.’
‘Yes, I suppose that’s so,’ answered naive little Nastenka, ‘but do you
know what just occurred to me? Only I’m not going to talk about him now,
but just in general; all of this occurred to me long ago. Listen, why is it that
we aren’t all like brothers to one another? Why is it that the very best
person is always hiding something from other people and is quiet about it?
Why not say frankly and immediately what’s in your heart, if you know that
you’re not speaking idly? As it is, everyone looks more severe than they
actually are, as though they’re all afraid their feelings will be hurt if they
reveal them too soon …’
‘Ah, Nastenka! What you say is true; and, you see, there are many
reasons for it,’ I interrupted, reining in my feelings at that moment more
than I had ever done before.
‘No, no!’ she answered with deep feeling. ‘Now you, for example, aren’t
like other people! I really don’t know how to tell you what I’m feeling; but
it seems to me that you, for example … even now … it seems that you’re
sacrificing something for me,’ she added timidly, with a fleeting glance at
me. ‘You’ll forgive me for putting it like that: you see, I’m a simple girl;
you see, I’ve seen very little of the world so far, and really at times I don’t
know how to talk,’ she added in a voice that was trembling with some sort
of hidden feeling, and meanwhile trying to smile, ‘but I only wanted to tell
you that I am grateful, that I feel all this as well … O, may God grant you
happiness for this! Now then, everything that you told me then about your
dreamer is absolutely untrue, that is, I wish to say that it doesn’t have
anything to do with you. You’re getting better, you really are a completely
different person from the one you described. If you ever fall in love, then
may God grant you happiness with her! But I won’t wish her anything,
because she will be happy with you. I know, I’m a woman myself, and you
must believe me, when I tell you …’

She fell silent and firmly squeezed my hand. I couldn’t say anything
either because of the emotion. Several minutes passed.
‘Yes, clearly he won’t come today!’ she said finally, raising her head. ‘It’s
late! …’
‘He’ll come tomorrow,’ I said in a most convincing and firm voice.
‘Yes,’ she added, having cheered up some, ‘I now see myself that he
won’t come until tomorrow. Well then, goodbye! Until tomorrow! If it rains,
then I might not come. But the day after tomorrow I’ll come, I’ll come
without fail, no matter what; you be here without fail; I want to see you, I’ll
tell you everything.’
And later, as we were saying goodbye, she gave me her hand and said,
looking at me brightly:
‘You see, now we’ll always be together, isn’t that so?’
Oh, Nastenka, Nastenka! If only you knew how lonely I am now!
When it struck nine o’clock, I couldn’t stay put in my room, I got dressed
and went out, despite the foul weather. I was there, sitting on our bench. I
started to walk down their lane, but I felt ashamed, and I turned back
without having a look at their windows, when I was just a few steps away
from their house. I came home more depressed than I had ever been. What a
damp, boring time! If the weather had been fine, I would have walked about
there all night long …
But until tomorrow! Until tomorrow! Tomorrow she will tell me
everything.
However, there was no letter today. But that was to be expected. They’re
together by now …


THE FOURTH NIGHT

My God! How it has all come to an end! What an ending to all of this!
I arrived at nine o’clock. She was already there. I caught sight of her
when I was still quite a distance away; she was standing like she had been
then, that first time, with her elbows leaning on the railing of the
embankment, and didn’t hear me approach.
‘Nastenka!’ I called out to her, making a tremendous effort to suppress
my agitation.
She quickly turned around towards me.
‘Well!’ she said, ‘well, quickly now!’
I looked at her in bewilderment.
‘Well, where’s the letter? Did you bring the letter?’ she repeated,
clutching the railing with her hand.
‘No, I don’t have a letter,’ I said finally, ‘has he really not come to see
you yet?’
She turned terribly pale and for a long time looked at me without
moving. I had shattered her last hope.
‘Well, good luck to him!’ she uttered finally in a breaking voice. ‘Good
luck to him – if he’s going to leave me like that.’
She lowered her eyes, then wanted to look at me, but she couldn’t. For
several more minutes she kept her agitation in check, but suddenly she
turned away, leaned her elbows on the balustrade of the embankment and
burst into tears.
‘Enough, enough!’ I began, but as I looked at her I didn’t have the
strength to continue, and what could I have said?
‘Don’t try to comfort me,’ she said, weeping, ‘don’t talk about him, don’t
say that he will come, that he wouldn’t abandon me so cruelly, so
inhumanly, as he has done. What for, what for? Can it really be that there
was something in my letter, in that wretched letter? …’

Here her voice was broken by sobs; my heart was breaking as I looked at
her.
‘Oh, how cruelly inhuman it is!’ she began again. ‘And not a line, not a
line! He could at least have answered that he didn’t need me, that he was
rejecting me; but not a single line in three whole days! How easy it is for
him to wound, to insult a poor defenceless girl, whose only fault is that she
loves him! Oh, what I’ve endured these three days! My God! My God!
When I recall that I went to him the first time myself, that I humbled myself
before him, wept, that I begged him for just the tiniest smidgen of love …
And after that! … Listen,’ she began, as she turned to me, and her black
eyes began to flash, ‘this cannot be! It simply cannot be like this; it’s
unnatural! Either you or I have been deceived; maybe he didn’t get the
letter? Perhaps he still doesn’t know anything? How is it possible, judge for
yourself, how is it possible to behave so barbarously and so coarsely as he
has towards me! Not a single word! But the lowliest man on earth is treated
with more compassion. Perhaps he heard something, perhaps somebody
said something about me?’ she cried out, turning to me with a question.
‘What, what do you think?’
‘Listen, Nastenka, tomorrow I’ll go and see him in your name.’
‘Yes?’
‘I’ll ask him about everything, I’ll tell him every-thing.’
‘Yes, yes?’
‘You write a letter. Don’t say no, Nastenka, don’t say no! I’ll make him
respect your action, he’ll learn everything, and if …’
‘No, my friend, no,’ she interrupted. ‘Enough! Not another word, not
another word from me, not a line, enough! I don’t know him, I don’t love
him any more, I will for … get him …’
She didn’t finish.
‘Calm yourself, calm yourself! Sit here, Nastenka,’ I said, as I seated her
on the bench.
‘But I am calm. Enough! It’s nothing. Just tears, they’ll dry! Do you
think that I’ll do away with myself, that I’ll drown myself? …’
My heart was full; I wanted to say something, but couldn’t.

‘Listen!’ she continued, taking me by the hand. ‘Tell me, would you have
acted like this? Would you have abandoned a girl who came to you on her
own, would you have thrown in her face a shameless jeer at her weak,
foolish heart? Would you have looked after her? Would you have
understood that she was all alone, that she didn’t know how to take care of
herself, that she didn’t know how to protect herself from loving you, that it
wasn’t her fault, that, finally, it wasn’t her fault … that she had done
nothing! … Oh, my God, my God! …’
‘Nastenka,’ I cried out finally, unable to control my agitation. ‘Nastenka!
You’re tearing me apart! You’re breaking my heart, you’re killing me,
Nastenka! I cannot be silent! I must finally speak, and tell you what has
been welling up here, in my heart …’
As I said this, I got up from the bench. She took me by the hand and
looked at me in surprise.
‘What is it?’ she uttered finally.
‘Listen!’ I said resolutely. ‘Listen to me, Nastenka! What I am about to
say is all nonsense, all impossible, all silly! I know that it can never happen,
but I cannot remain silent. In the name of all that you are suffering now, I
beg of you beforehand to forgive me! …’
‘Well, what, what is it?’ she said, having stopped crying and looking at
me intently, while a strange curiosity shone in her astonished eyes. ‘What is
it?’
‘It’s impossible, but I love you, Nastenka! That’s what it is! Well, now
everything has been said!’ I said with a wave of my hand. ‘Now you will
see whether you can talk with me as you were just talking, whether, finally,
you can listen to what I’m going to say …’
‘Well, what of it? What of it?’ Nastenka interrupted, ‘what of it? Well, I
knew long ago that you loved me, only it always seemed to me that you
loved me simply, in a different way … Oh, my God, my God!’
‘In the beginning it was simple, Nastenka, but now, now … I’m in
exactly the same position as you were when you went to him with your
bundle. Worse than you, Nastenka, because he didn’t love someone then,
but you do.’

‘What is it you’re saying to me! I truly don’t understand you at all. But
listen here, why ever, that is, not why, but what reason do you have for so
suddenly … My God! I’m talking nonsense! But you …’
And Nastenka became thoroughly confused. Her cheeks were flushed;
she lowered her eyes.
‘What’s to be done, Nastenka, what am I to do? I am to blame, I abused
your … But no, no, I’m not to blame, Nastenka; I know it, I feel it, because
my heart tells me that I’m right, because I cannot hurt you, I cannot offend
you! I was your friend; well, and that is what I am now; I have betrayed
nothing. You see, now it’s me whose tears are streaming down, Nastenka.
Let them stream, let them stream – they won’t bother anybody. They will
dry, Nastenka …’
‘But sit down, do sit down,’ she said, as she was seating me on the bench,
‘oh, my God!’
‘No, Nastenka, I won’t sit down; I can’t stay here any longer, you won’t
see me any more; I’ll say everything and leave. I only want to say that you
would never have learned that I love you. I would have buried my secret. I
would not have tormented you, at this moment, with my egoism. No! But I
couldn’t bear it any longer now; you spoke of it yourself, you are to blame,
you are to blame for all this, not me. You can’t drive me away from you …’
‘No, of course not, no, I’m not driving you off, no!’ Nastenka said,
concealing, as best she could, her embarrassment, the poor thing.
‘You’re not driving me away? No! But I was going to run away from you
myself. And I will leave, as soon as I tell you everything from the
beginning, because when you were talking just now, I couldn’t sit still,
when you were crying just now, when you were suffering because, well
because (I’ll say it, Nastenka), because you were rejected, because your
love had been spurned, I sensed, I felt in my heart that there was so much
love for you, Nastenka, so much love! … And I was so sorry that I couldn’t
help you with this love … that my heart was breaking, and I, I – could not
be silent, I had to speak, Nastenka, I had to speak! …’
‘Yes, yes! Speak to me, speak to me like that!’ Nastenka said with an
inexplicable gesture. ‘It might seem strange to you that I’m speaking to you

like this, but … speak! I’ll tell you later! I’ll tell you everything!’
‘You feel sorry for me, Nastenka; you simply feel sorry for me, my little
friend! What’s done is done! What’s said can’t be taken back! Isn’t that so?
Well, now you know everything. Well, that’s a starting point. Well, all right!
Everything’s fine now; only listen. When you were sitting and crying, I was
thinking to myself (oh, let me tell you what I was thinking!), I was thinking
that (well, of course, this could never be, Nastenka), I was thinking that you
… I was thinking that you somehow … well, that you quite on your own
had stopped loving him. Then – I was thinking this yesterday and the day
before yesterday, Nastenka – then I would have made you, I would certainly
have made you fall in love with me; you said, you know, you were saying
yourself, Nastenka, that you had almost fallen in love with me. Well, what
else? Well, that’s almost everything that I wanted to say; it remains only to
say what it would have been like if you had fallen in love with me, only
that, nothing more! Listen then, my friend – because you are still my friend
– of course, I’m a simple person, poor and insignificant, only that’s not the
point (I somehow keep talking about the wrong things, that’s because I’m
embarrassed, Nastenka), but only I would love you so, I would love you so,
that even if you still loved him and continued to love this person whom I
don’t know, you still would not find my love to be a burden to you in any
way. You would only feel, you would only sense at every moment that next
to you beats a grateful, grateful heart, an ardent heart, which for your sake
… Oh, Nastenka, Nastenka! What have you done to me! …’
‘Now, don’t cry, I don’t want you to cry,’ Nastenka said, quickly getting
up from the bench, ‘come along, get up, come with me, don’t cry, don’t cry,’
she kept saying, as she wiped away my tears with her handkerchief, ‘well,
come along now; perhaps I’ll tell you something … Yes, if he has
abandoned me now, if he has forgotten me, even though I still love him (I
don’t wish to deceive you) … but, listen, answer me. If, for example, I were
to love you, that is, if only I … Oh, my friend, my friend! When I think,
when I think how I insulted you then when I laughed at your love, when I
praised you for not falling in love! … Oh, my God! How did I not foresee

it, how did I not foresee this, how could I have been so stupid, but … Well,
well, I’ve made up my mind, I’ll tell you everything …’
‘Listen, Nastenka, do you know what? I’ll go away, that’s what! I’m
simply tormenting you. Now you have pangs of remorse because you made
fun of me, but I don’t want, yes, I don’t want you, in addition to your
sorrow … Of course, I’m to blame, Nastenka, but goodbye!’
‘Stop, hear me out: can you wait?’
‘Wait for what, why?’
‘I love him; but that will pass, it must pass, it cannot but pass; it’s already
passing, I can sense it … Who knows, perhaps it will even end today,
because I hate him, because he’s had a good laugh at my expense, while
you were crying here with me, because you didn’t reject me, like he did,
because you love me, and he didn’t love me, because finally I love you
myself … yes, I love! I love as you love me; you know, I myself even said
so to you, you heard it yourself – because I love that you are better than he
is, because you are nobler than he is, because, because he …’
The poor girl’s agitation was so intense that she didn’t finish, she put her
head on my shoulder, then on my chest and burst into bitter tears. I
comforted her, tried to bring her round, but she couldn’t stop; she kept
squeezing my hand and saying between sobs: ‘Wait, wait, I’ll stop in just a
minute! I want to tell you … don’t think that these tears – it’s just weakness,
wait until it passes …’ Finally, she stopped, wiped away her tears and we
set off walking once again. I wanted to speak, but for a long time yet she
kept asking me to wait. We fell silent … Finally, she plucked up her
courage and began to speak.
‘Now listen to me,’ she began in a weak and trembling voice, but one in
which there was a ring of something that pierced right through my heart and
began to ache there sweetly, ‘don’t think that I am so fickle and flighty,
don’t think that I can so easily and quickly forget and be untrue … I loved
him for a whole year and I swear to God that never, never was I unfaithful
to him even in thought. He disdained this; he had a good laugh at my
expense – good luck to him! But he wounded me and insulted my heart. I –
I do not love him, because I can love only that which is magnanimous,

which understands me, which is noble; because I am like that myself, and
he is not worthy of me – well, good luck to him! It’s better that he
disappoint me now than for me to learn what he’s like later on … Well, of
course! But who knows, my dear friend,’ she continued, squeezing my
hand, ‘who knows, perhaps all my love amounted to nothing more than my
feelings and imagination, just my imagination, perhaps it began as a prank
or foolishness, all because I was under Grandmother’s watch. Perhaps I
ought to love someone else, another, and not him, not a man like him, but
someone who would take pity on me and, and … Well, let’s leave it at that,
let’s leave it at that,’ Nastenka broke off, choked with emotion, ‘I only
wanted to say to you … I wanted to say that if, despite the fact that I love
him (no, loved him), if, despite that, you will still say … if you feel that
your love is so great that it may in the end drive out from my heart the
former … if you wish to take pity on me, if you don’t wish to leave me
alone to my fate, without consolation, without hope, if you wish to love me
always as you now love me, then I swear that gratitude … that my love will
in the end be worthy of your love … Will you take my hand now?’
‘Nastenka,’ I cried out, choking with sobs, ‘Nastenka! … Oh, Nastenka!
…’
‘Well, enough, enough! Well, now that’s certainly enough!’ she said,
hardly able to control herself, ‘well, now everything has been said; isn’t that
right? Isn’t that so? Well, and you’re happy, and I’m happy; not another
word more about this; wait – spare me … Talk about something else, for
God’s sake! …’
‘Yes, Nastenka, yes! Enough about that, now I am happy, I … Well,
Nastenka, well, let’s talk about something else, quickly; yes, quickly, let’s
talk about something else; yes! I’m ready …’
And we didn’t know what to say, we laughed, we cried, we said
thousands of words without rhyme or reason; we first walked along the
sidewalk, then suddenly we turned back and crossed the street; then we
stopped and began to cross over to the embankment; we were like children
…

‘I live alone now, Nastenka,’ I said, ‘but tomorrow … Well, of course,
I’m poor, you know, Nastenka, I only have twelve hundred roubles, but that
doesn’t matter …’
‘Of course not, and Grandmother has her pension; so she won’t be a
burden to us. We must take Grandmother.’
‘Of course, we must take Grandmother … Only there’s Matryona …’
‘Oh, and we have Fyokla as well!’
‘Matryona is a good woman, only she has one fault: she doesn’t have any
imagination, Nastenka, absolutely no imagination whatsoever; but that
doesn’t matter! …’
‘It doesn’t make any difference; they can both live together; only you
must move to our house tomorrow.’
‘What did you say? To your house? Fine, I’m ready …’
‘Yes, you’ll rent from us. We have an attic upstairs, it’s empty; there was
a lodger, an old woman, a noblewoman, she’s moved out, and Grandmother,
I know, wants to rent it to a young man; I said: “Why exactly a young
man?” And she says: “Just because, I’m old now, but just don’t you start
thinking, Nastenka, that I want to marry you off to him.” So I guessed that it
was for that very reason …’
‘Oh, Nastenka! …’
And we both laughed.
‘Well, enough of that, enough. But where is it that you live? I’ve
forgotten.’
‘Over there, by —sky Bridge, in Barannikov’s building.’
‘Is it that big house?’
‘Yes, the big house.’
‘Oh, I know it, it’s a good house; only you must leave it, you know, and
move in with us as soon as possible …’
‘Tomorrow, then, Nastenka, tomorrow; I owe a bit for my apartment, but
that doesn’t matter … I’ll receive my salary soon …’
‘And you know, perhaps I can give lessons; I’ll learn something myself
and then I’ll give lessons …’
‘Well, now that’s wonderful … and I’ll get my bonus soon, Nastenka …’

‘So, then, tomorrow you’ll be my lodger …’
‘Yes, and we’ll go see The Barber of Seville, because they’re going to put
it on again soon.’
‘Yes, let’s go,’ Nastenka said, smiling, ‘no, it would be better to see
something else and not the Barber …’
‘Well, fine, something else; of course, that would be better, what was I
thinking …’
As we said this, we were both walking in some kind of stupor, in a haze,
as if we didn’t know ourselves what was happening to us. One moment we
would stop and talk for a long time without moving, then we would start
walking again and God only knows where we ended up, and then laughter
again, and then tears … Then Nastenka would suddenly want to go home,
and I didn’t dare keep her and wanted to see her home; we would set off
and a quarter of an hour later we would find ourselves on the embankment
by our bench. Then she would sigh, and once again her eyes would well up
with tears; I would turn timid, and then feel a chill … But she would
immediately squeeze my hand and drag me off to walk, to chatter, to talk …
‘It’s time now, it’s time for me to go home; I think it must be quite late,’
Nastenka said at last, ‘we’ve been behaving like children long enough!’
‘Yes, Nastenka, only I won’t fall asleep now; I won’t go home.’
‘I don’t think I’ll sleep either; just see me home …’
‘Absolutely!’
‘Only this time we absolutely must walk all the way to the apartment.’
‘Absolutely, absolutely …’
‘Word of honour? … Because, you see, I must return home at some
point!’
‘Word of honour,’ I answered, laughing …
‘Well, let’s go!’
‘Let’s go! Look at the sky, Nastenka, look! Tomorrow will be a
wonderful day; what a blue sky, what a moon! Look: see how that yellow
cloud is beginning to hide it from view, look, look! … No, it’s passed by.
Look now, look! …’

But Nastenka wasn’t looking at the cloud, she stood speechless, rooted to
the ground; a minute later she began somewhat timidly clinging to me
tightly. Her hand began to tremble in my hand; I glanced at her … She
pressed against me more tightly still …
At that moment a young man walked past us. He suddenly stopped,
looked at us intently and then took several steps. My heart began to quiver
…
‘Nastenka,’ I said in a hushed voice, ‘who is that, Nastenka?’
‘It’s him!’ she answered in a whisper, clinging to me even more tightly
and more timidly … I could barely keep standing on my own two feet.
‘Nastenka! Nastenka! It’s you!’ we heard a voice behind us, and at that
moment the young man took several steps towards us.
My God, what a cry! How she shuddered! How she tore herself from my
arms and flew to meet him! … I stood and watched them, crushed. But she
had scarcely given him her hand, had scarcely thrown herself into his
embrace, when she suddenly turned to me again, and was at my side in a
flash, like the wind, and before I had a chance to collect myself, she flung
both arms around my neck and kissed me firmly, ardently. Then, without
saying a word to me, she rushed to him again, took him by the hand and led
him away.
I stood for a long time and watched them walk away … Finally, both of
them vanished from sight.


MORNING

My nights ended with the morning. It was a dreadful day. The rain beat
down on my windows cheerlessly; it was dark in the room, it was overcast
outside. My head ached and was spinning; fever was stealing its way
through my limbs.
‘A letter for you, sir, it came by the city post, the postman brought it,’
Matryona said, hovering over me.
‘A letter! From whom?’ I cried out, jumping up from my chair.
‘That I wouldn’t know, sir, have a look; maybe it’s written down there
who it’s from.’
I broke the seal. It was from her!
Oh, forgive, forgive me! (Nastenka wrote me) I beg you on my knees to forgive me! I
deceived both you and myself. It was a dream, a phantom … I have suffered torments
about you today; forgive me, forgive me! …
Don’t blame me, because I haven’t changed in the least towards you; I said that I
would love you, and I love you now, I more than love you. Oh, my God! If only I could
love you both at the same time! Oh, if only you were he!

‘Oh, if only he were you!’ flashed through my mind. I remembered your
words, Nastenka!
God knows what I would do for you now! I know that you’re miserable and sad. I have
hurt you, but you know – when one loves, an injury is soon forgotten. And you love me!
Thank you! Yes, thank you for that love! Because it is stamped on my memory like a
sweet dream that you remember long after waking up; because I will forever remember
that moment when you opened up your heart to me like a brother and so generously
accepted the gift of my shattered heart to protect, cherish and heal it … If you forgive me,
then the memory of you will be exalted in me by a feeling of eternal gratitude to you that
will never quit my heart … I will keep that memory alive, I will be true to it, I will not
betray it, I will not betray my heart: it is too constant. It returned so quickly yesterday to
him to whom it had always belonged.
We will meet, you will visit us, you will not abandon us, you will always be a friend,
my brother … And when you see me, you will give me your hand … won’t you? You will
give it to me, you have forgiven me, isn’t that so? Do you love me as you did before?
Oh, love me, don’t leave me, because I love you so at this moment, because I am
worthy of your love, because I will deserve it … my dear friend! Next week I am to be

married to him. He returned in love with me, he never forgot me … You won’t be angry
that I have written about him. But I want to come and see you with him; you will love
him, won’t you? …
Forgive me, remember and love your –
Nastenka

I read that letter over and over again for a long time; the tears welled up
in my eyes. At last it fell out of my hands, and I covered my face with my
hands.
‘Dearie! Come now, dearie!’ Matryona began.
‘What is it, old woman?’
‘I got all the cobwebs off the ceiling; now you can get married, or invite
some guests, it’s just the time for it …’
I looked at Matryona … She was still a hale and hearty, young old
woman, but I don’t know why, suddenly I pictured her with a vacant stare,
wrinkled face, stooped, decrepit. I don’t know why but I suddenly pictured
that my room had aged as much as the old woman. The walls and floors
were faded, everything had become dingy; and the cobwebs had multiplied
so there were more than ever before. I don’t know why, when I glanced out
the window, it seemed to me that the house opposite had also become
decrepit and dingy, that the plasterwork on the columns was peeling and
crumbling, that the cornices had turned black and were cracked, and that the
walls which had been painted a bright, deep yellow had become patchy …
Either a ray of sunshine, after suddenly peeping out from behind a cloud,
had again hidden behind a rain cloud, and everything had darkened again
before my eyes; or perhaps the whole vista of my future had flashed before
me so bleakly and so sadly, and I saw myself just as I am now exactly
fifteen years later, only older, in the same room, just as lonely, with the
same Matryona, who hasn’t grown any wiser in all those years.
But that I should nurse a grudge, Nastenka! That I should cast a dark
cloud over your bright, serene happiness; that I, with bitter reproaches,
should cast pangs of anguish on your heart, wound it with secret remorse
and force it to beat with anguish at the moment of bliss; that I would crush
even one of those delicate flowers that you plaited into your black curls
when you walked together with him to the altar … Oh, never, never! May

your sky be clear, may your sweet smile be bright and serene, may you be
blessed for that moment of bliss and happiness that you gave to another
lonely, grateful heart!
My God! A whole minute of bliss! Is that really so little for the whole of
a man’s life?
1848


Bobok

This time I’m submitting ‘The Notes of a Certain Person’. It is not I; it is by
an altogether different person. I think nothing more in the way of an
introduction is necessary.
THE NOTES OF A CERTAIN PERSON

The day before yesterday Semyon Ardalyonovich suddenly comes out with:
‘And would you kindly tell me, Ivan Ivanych, will the day come when
you’ll be sober?’
A strange request. I don’t take offence, I’m a shy person; but, just the
same, they’ve gone and made me out to be a madman. An artist happened to
paint my portrait: ‘After all,’ he says, ‘you’re a literary man.’ I acquiesced,
and he exhibited it. I read: ‘Go take a look at this sickly face that is on the
verge of madness.’
Even if my face is like that, really how can one be so direct in print? In
print everything should be noble: there should be ideals, but here …
At the very least say it indirectly, that’s what you have style for. No, he
doesn’t want to do it indirectly. Nowadays humour and good style are
disappearing and swear words are taken for wit. I’m not offended, I’m not
some God-knows-what-kind of fancy man of letters to lose my mind over
something like that. I wrote a story – it wasn’t published. I wrote a

feuilleton – it was rejected. I took a lot of these feuilletons around to
different publishers, and was rejected everywhere: ‘You don’t have enough
salt,’ they told me.
‘What kind of salt do you want?’ I ask with scorn. ‘Attic salt?’
He doesn’t even understand. For the most part, I translate from French
for the booksellers. And I write advertisements for the merchants. ‘A rare
treat! Fine tea,’ I write, ‘from our own plantations …’ I made a bundle on a
panegyric for His Excellency, the late Pyotr Matveyevich. I was
commissioned by a bookseller to compile The Art of Pleasing the Ladies.
I’ve put out about six books like this in my lifetime. I want to collect
Voltaire’s bon mots, but I’m afraid that they’ll seem a bit flat to people here.
Who needs Voltaire now; these days it’s a cudgel you need, not Voltaire!
We’ve knocked out each other’s teeth – every last one! Well, and that’s the
whole extent of my literary endeavours. Although I do dispatch letters to the
editorial offices free of charge, signed with my name in full. I give advice
and make recommendations, I offer criticism and point out the proper path.
Last week I sent my fortieth letter in two years to a certain editorial office;
I’ve spent four roubles on stamps alone. I have a nasty temper, that’s what it
is.
I think the painter did my portrait not for the sake of literature, but for the
sake of the two symmetrical warts on my forehead: it’s a phenomenon, he
says. They don’t have any ideas, so now they resort to phenomena. Well,
and what a fine job he did of capturing my warts in the portrait – they’re
lifelike! That’s what they call realism.
And as far as madness is concerned, last year a lot of people were put
down as mad. And with such style: ‘Such an original talent …’ they say,
‘and then towards the end it turned out that … However, this should have
been foreseen long ago …’ This is still rather ingenious; so that one might
even praise it from the point of view of pure art. Well, and then suddenly
these madmen came back even smarter. There you are – we know how to
drive people out of their minds, but we’ve never made anyone smarter …
In my opinion, the one who’s smarter than all the rest is the one who calls
himself a fool at least once a month – an unheard of talent nowadays!

Before, a fool knew once a year at the very least that he was a fool, but now
nothing doing. And they’ve muddled things so that you can’t tell a fool
from an intelligent person. They do this on purpose.
I’m reminded of a Spanish witticism, when two and a half centuries ago
the French built the first madhouse: ‘They locked up all their fools in a
special building to reassure themselves that they’re the sane ones.’ But
really, locking somebody else up in a madhouse doesn’t prove that you have
brains. ‘K. lost his mind, that means that we are sane.’ No, that isn’t what
that means.
However, what the devil … and why am I fussing about my brains: I
grumble and grumble. Even the servant girl is tired of it. Yesterday a friend
dropped by: ‘Your style is changing,’ he says, ‘it’s choppy. You chop and
chop – and then you’ve got a parenthetic clause, then you pile on another
parenthetic clause, and then you stick something else in parentheses, and
then you start chopping and chopping again …’
My friend’s right. Something strange is happening to me. And my
character is changing, and my head aches. I’m beginning to see and hear
certain strange things. Not exactly voices, but it’s as if someone were right
beside me, saying: ‘Bobok, bobok, bobok!’
What is this bobok? I need some diversion.
I went out in search of diversion and ended up at a funeral. A distant
relative. A collegiate councillor, however. A widow, five daughters, all
young. What it must come to just for shoes alone! The deceased managed,
but now there’s only a little pension. They’ll have their tails between their
legs. I had always been given a less than hearty welcome. And I wouldn’t
have gone now if it hadn’t been such a special occasion. I took part in the
procession to the cemetery along with the others; they keep their distance
and put on airs. My uniform, indeed, is in pretty bad shape. It’s been about
twenty-five years, I think, since I’ve been to the cemetery; there’s a nice
little place for you!
First of all, the smell. About fifteen corpses had arrived. Palls of various
prices; there were even two catafalques: one for a general and one for some

lady. There were a lot of mournful faces, and a lot of bogus mourning as
well, and even a lot of undisguised gaiety. The clergy can’t complain: it’s
money. But the smell, the smell. I wouldn’t want to be one of the local
ecclesiastics.
I took a cautious look at the corpses, not having confidence in controlling
my impressionability. There were some gentle expressions, but there were
unpleasant ones as well. Generally, the smiles weren’t very nice, and some
were quite far from nice. I don’t like them; I’ll have dreams about them.
During the service I walked out of the church for some air; it was a
greyish day, but dry. It was cold as well; well, it is October after all. I
walked for a bit among the graves. There are various classes. The third class
costs thirty roubles: decent and not too expensive. The first two classes are
inside the church and under the church porch; well, they charge an arm and
a leg for those. This time there were six third-class burials, including the
general and the lady.
I glanced in the graves – it was terrible: water, and what water! It was
absolutely green and … well, let’s leave it at that! The gravedigger was
constantly bailing it out with a bucket. As the service was still going on, I
strolled outside the gates. There’s an almshouse right there and a bit further
on there’s a restaurant. The little restaurant wasn’t bad – fair to middling –
and you can get a bite to eat and everything. It was packed with mourners. I
noticed a good deal of merrymaking and heartfelt liveliness. I had a bite to
eat and something to drink.
Later I took part with my own hands in bearing the coffin from the
church to the grave. Why is it that corpses are so heavy in their coffins?
They say that it’s because of some sort of inertia, that the body is no longer
in control of itself … or some such nonsense; it contradicts mechanics and
common sense. I don’t like it when people with only a general education
rush in to solve problems best left to specialists; and that happens all the
time among us. Civilians like to have opinions on military matters, even
those that concern a field marshal, while people educated as engineers more
often than not have opinions on philosophy and political economy.

I didn’t go to the prayer service. I’m proud, and if I’m only to be received
out of dire necessity, then why should I trail along to their dinners, even if it
is a funeral dinner? Only I don’t understand why I stayed on at the
cemetery; I sat down on a monument and became suitably thoughtful.
I began with the Moscow exhibition and ended with the subject of
astonishment in general. Here’s what I came up with about ‘astonishment’:
‘To be astonished at everything, of course, is silly, while to be astonished
at nothing is much more handsome, and for some reason is recognized as
good form. But surely it’s not like that in reality. In my opinion, it’s much
sillier to be astonished at nothing than to be astonished at everything. And
what’s more: to be astonished at nothing is almost the same thing as to
respect nothing. And a silly man is not capable of showing respect.’
‘And above all I want to feel respect. I thirst to feel respect,’ an
acquaintance of mine said to me on one occasion recently.
He thirsts to feel respect! And my God, I thought, what would become of
you if you dared to print that now!
And that’s when I started daydreaming. I don’t like reading the
inscriptions on gravestones; it’s forever the same thing. A half-eaten
sandwich lay on the gravestone next to me: it was silly and out of place. I
threw it on the ground, since it wasn’t bread but just a sandwich. However,
dropping bread crumbs on the ground isn’t a sin, it seems; it’s when it’s on
the floor that it’s a sin. I should look it up in Suvorin’s calendar.
One might suppose that I’d been sitting there for a long time, even too
long; that is, I even lay down on a long stone in the shape of a marble
coffin. And how did it happen that I suddenly began to hear various things?
At first I didn’t pay any attention and regarded it with disdain. However, the
conversation continued. I listened – the sounds were muffled, as though
they had pillows covering their mouths; and yet they were intelligible and
very near. I roused myself, sat up and began to listen carefully.
‘Your Excellency, this is simply impossible, sir. You declared hearts, I’m
following your lead and suddenly you have the seven of diamonds. We
should have made arrangements about diamonds earlier, sir.’

‘What’s that, you mean we should play by rote? Where’s the attraction in
that?’
‘You can’t, Your Excellency. You can’t play without rules. We absolutely
must have a dummy and the cards must be dealt face down.’
‘Well, you won’t find a dummy here.’
What arrogant words, however! Both strange and unexpected. One voice
was so weighty and dignified, while the other seemed softly honeyed; I
wouldn’t have believed it if I hadn’t heard it myself. I didn’t think I was at
the prayer service. And yet how was it that they’re playing preference here
and who was this general? That it was coming from under the gravestone
there could be no doubt. I bent down and read the inscription on the
tombstone.
‘Here lies the body of Major General Pervoyedov … Knight of such and
such orders.’ Hm. ‘Passed away in August of the year … fifty-seven …
Rest, dear ashes, until the joyful morn!’
Hm, the devil, he really is a general! There wasn’t a tombstone yet on the
other grave, the one the ingratiating voice came from; there was only a
stone slab; must be a newcomer. Judging by his voice he was a court
councillor.
‘Oh-ho-ho-ho!’ an altogether different voice could be heard coming from
a quite new grave some dozen yards away from the general’s spot. It
belonged to a man of the common people, but modulated to an
obsequiously pious manner.
‘Oh-ho-ho-ho!’
‘Ah, he’s hiccuping again!’ suddenly resounded the squeamish and
haughty voice of an irritated lady, who seemed to be from the highest
society. ‘My punishment is to lie next to this shopkeeper!’
‘No, I didn’t hiccup at all, and I haven’t taken any food, it’s simply my
nature. And still and all, my lady, these whims of yours just won’t let you
settle down here.’
‘So why did you have to lie down here?’
‘They put me here, my wife and the little ones put me here, I didn’t lie
down here myself. The mysteries of death! And I wouldn’t have lain down

next to you for anything, not for all the money in the world; but my own
capital got me my place here, reckoning by the price, madam. For we can
always do that, I mean, put enough aside for our own third-class grave.’
‘You made a bundle, cheated people?’
‘How could we cheat you, when it seems there’s been no payment from
you since January? We’ve got a little bill in your name at the shop.’
‘Well, now that’s silly; in my opinion, it’s very silly to look to have debts
settled here! Go upstairs. Ask my niece; she’s my heir.’
‘But who can I ask now and where can I go? We have both reached the
end, and before the judgement seat of God we are equal in our trespasses.’
‘In our trespasses!’ the dead woman mimicked disdainfully. ‘And don’t
you dare speak another word to me!’
‘Oh-ho-ho-ho!’
‘The shopkeeper nevertheless obeys the lady, Your Excellency.’
‘And why shouldn’t he obey?’
‘Well, Your Excellency, as we know there’s a new order here.’
‘What new order is that?’
‘Well, you see, we’re dead, so to speak, Your Excellency.’
‘Ah, yes! But still there’s order …’
Well, haven’t they done us a favour! What a comfort! If it’s already
reached this point here, then why bother questioning what it’s like upstairs?
But how they carry on! However, I continued listening, though with
extreme indignation.
‘No, I would have lived a bit longer! No … I, you know … I would have
lived a bit!’ a new voice suddenly made itself heard from somewhere
between the general and the irritable lady.
‘Do you hear, Your Excellency, our friend is at it again. He’s quiet as can
be for three days, and then suddenly: “I would have lived a bit! yes, I would
have lived a bit!” And, you know, with such an appetite, he-he!’
‘And with such thoughtlessness.’
‘He can’t help it, Your Excellency, and, you know, he falls asleep, he’s
already fast asleep; after all he’s been here since April, you see, and then

suddenly: “I would have lived a bit.”’
‘On the boring side, though,’ His Excellency observed.
‘On the boring side, Your Excellency. Perhaps we should tease Avdotya
Ignatyevna again, he-he?’
‘Please don’t, spare me that. I can’t stand that quick-tempered crybaby.’
‘And I, for that matter, can’t stand the two of you either,’ the crybaby
answered contemptuously. ‘You’re both incredible bores and you don’t
know how to talk about the ideal. I know a little story about you, Your
Excellency – don’t flatter yourself – about how a servant swept you out
with a broom from under a certain married couple’s bed one morning.’
‘Nasty woman!’ the general muttered through clenched teeth.
‘Dear Avdotya Ignatyevna,’ the shopkeeper cried out again suddenly, ‘my
dear lady, tell me, and don’t hold it against me, am I in the torments now, or
is something else happening?’
‘Ah, he’s back on the same thing again; I had a feeling he would be,
because there’s a smell coming from him, a smell from his tossing and
turning.’
‘I’m not tossing and turning, ma’am, and there’s no particular smell
coming from me, because I’ve still managed to preserve my body whole,
while you, my lady, have really started to go bad – because the smell indeed
is unbearable, even for this place. I’ve kept quiet merely out of politeness.’
‘Ah, you and your nasty insults! He’s the one who reeks, and he blames
me.’
‘Oh-ho-ho-ho! If only these forty days would pass: I’d hear tearful voices
above me, my wife wailing and the children softly weeping! …’
‘Well, what a thing to weep about: they’ll stuff themselves with kutya and
leave. Ah, if only somebody would wake up!’
‘Avdotya Ignatyevna,’ the smooth-tongued official spoke up, ‘wait a little
bit, the new ones will start talking.’
‘And are there any young people among them?’
‘Young people as well, Avdotya Ignatyevna. There are even some young
men.’
‘Ah, just what we need!’

‘What, haven’t they begun yet?’ His Excellency enquired.
‘Even the ones from the day before yesterday haven’t woken up yet, Your
Excellency, you yourself know that sometimes they’re quiet for a week. It’s
a good thing that yesterday and the day before and today they brought a
whole lot all at once. Otherwise, you see, they’re all from last year for
seventy feet around.’
‘Yes, that should be interesting.’
‘Now, Your Excellency, today they buried Tarasevich, the actual privy
councillor. I recognized the voices. I know his nephew who helped lower
the coffin just now.’
‘Hm, whereabout is he then?’
‘About five paces away from you, Your Excellency, to the left. He’s
almost at your feet, sir … There’s somebody you should get acquainted
with, Your Excellency.’
‘Hm, no … I shouldn’t be the first to make a move.’
‘But he’ll do that, Your Excellency. He’ll even be flattered; leave it to
me, Your Excellency, and I’ll …’
‘Ah, ah … Ah, what’s happening to me?’ somebody’s frightened, new
little voice suddenly wheezed.
‘It’s a new one, Your Excellency, a new one, thank God, and so soon!
Sometimes they’re silent for a whole week.’
‘Ah, I believe it’s a young man!’ Avdotya Ignatyevna cried out.
‘I … I … I … from complications, and so suddenly!’ the youth began to
babble again. ‘Just the day before Schultz tells me: “You have
complications,” he says, and suddenly I up and die by the morning. Ah!
Ah!’
‘Well, there’s nothing to be done, young man,’ observed the general
kindly, evidently delighted by the novice. ‘You must console yourself.
Welcome to our Vale of Jehoshaphat, so to speak. We’re good people, you’ll
get to know us and appreciate us. Major General Vasily Vasilyev
Pervoyedov, at your service.’
‘Ah, no! No, no, absolutely not, sir! I went to Schultz; you see, I had
complications, first in my chest and then a cough, and later I caught cold:

the chest and the flu … and then suddenly, quite unexpectedly … that’s the
main thing, it was quite unexpected.’
‘You say that it started in the chest,’ the official gently interjected, as if
wishing to encourage the novice.
‘Yes, the chest and phlegm, but then suddenly the phlegm and chest were
gone, and I couldn’t breathe … and you know …’
‘I know, I know. But if it was the chest, you should have gone to Ecke,
not to Schultz.’
‘But, you know, I kept meaning to go to Botkin … and suddenly …’
‘Well, but Botkin’s unreasonable,’ the general observed.
‘Ah, no, he’s not at all unreasonable; I’ve heard that he’s so attentive and
will tell you everything in advance.’
‘His Excellency was referring to the price,’ the official set him straight.
‘Ah, not at all, just three roubles, and he examines you so well, and you
get a prescription … and I definitely wanted to, because I was told … So
then, gentlemen, should I go see Ecke or Botkin?’
‘What? See whom?’ the general’s corpse began to rock with pleasant
laughter. The official followed suit in falsetto.
‘Dear boy, dear, delightful boy, how I love you!’ Avdotya Ignatyevna
cried out, beside herself. ‘Now if only they’d put one like you next to me!’
No, I simply cannot countenance that! And this is the dead of today!
However, I should listen some more and not jump to conclusions. This
whimpering novice – I remember seeing him in his coffin earlier – wore the
expression of a frightened chicken, the most revolting thing in the whole
world! However, what’s next?
But what came next was such a muddled affair that I didn’t manage to
retain all of it in my memory, for a great many of them woke up all at once:
an official woke up, a state councillor, and he began immediately discussing
with the general the project of a new subcommittee in the Department of —
Affairs and in connection with this about the probable transfer of public
servants, all of which the general found very, very entertaining. I confess
that I also learned a lot that was new, so much so that I marvelled at the

ways by which it is sometimes possible to come by government news in this
capital. Then an engineer half woke up, but for a long time afterwards
muttered such absolute nonsense that our friends didn’t bother him, but
instead let him rest. Finally, the noble lady who had been buried under the
catafalque that morning showed signs of sepulchral animation.
Lebezyatnikov (for the ingratiating court councillor whom I detested turned
out to be named Lebezyatnikov) was surprised and made a great deal of
fuss that they were all waking up so soon this time. I confess, I was
surprised as well; however, some of those who woke up had been buried the
day before yesterday, for example, a very young girl, about sixteen years
old, but who was all giggles … disgusting and lustful giggles.
‘Your Excellency, Privy Counsillor Tarasevich is waking up!’
Lebezyatnikov suddenly announced with extraordinary urgency.
‘Eh? What’s that?’ the suddenly awakened privy councillor mumbled
demandingly in a lisping voice. His voice sounded both capricious and
imperious. I listened with curiosity, for during these past few days I had
heard something about this Tarasevich – something highly suggestive and
alarming.
‘It’s me, Your Excellency, sir, so far it’s only me, sir.’
‘What do you want and how can I help you?’
‘Merely to enquire after Your Excellency’s health; not being accustomed
to the circumstances here, sir, everybody at first feels rather cramped, as it
were … General Pervoyedov would like to have the honour of making Your
Excellency’s acquaintance and wishes …’
‘Never heard of him.’
‘For goodness’ sake, Your Excellency, General Pervoyedov, Vasily
Vasilyevich …’
‘Are you General Pervoyedov?’
‘No, Your Excellency, I am merely Court Councillor Lebezyatnikov, sir,
at your service, but General Pervoyedov …’
‘Nonsense! And I’ll ask you to leave me in peace.’
‘Let him be,’ General Pervoyedov himself, with a dignified air, finally
put a stop to the vile haste of his sepulchral attendant.

‘He’s not fully awake yet, Your Excellency, you need to take that into
consideration, sir; it’s on account that he’s not accustomed, sir: he’ll wake
up and then he’ll take it differently, sir …’
‘Let him be,’ the general repeated.
‘Vasily Vasilyevich! Hey you, Your Excellency!’ an entirely new voice
suddenly cried out loudly and excitedly, right next to Avdotya Ignatyevna. It
was the impertinent voice of a gentleman with a fashionably weary mode of
expression and impudent delivery. ‘I’ve been observing all of you for two
hours now; I’ve been lying here three days now; do you remember me,
Vasily Vasilyevich? Klinevich, we used to meet at the Volokonskys, where,
I don’t know why, you were also received.’
‘What, Count Pyotr Petrovich … is that really you? … and at such a
young age … I am so sorry!’
‘And I’m sorry myself, but it’s really all the same to me, and I want to
get as much as possible from every quarter here. And it’s not Count, but
Baron, I’m merely a baron. We’re some sort of mangy little barons, our
people were lackeys, and I don’t know why – to hell with it! I’m merely a
scoundrel from pseudo-high society and thought to be a charming polisson.
My father was some sort of little general, and my mother was once received
en haut lieu. Zieffel the Yid and I passed off 50,000 roubles in counterfeit
banknotes, and I informed against him, but Yulka Charpentier de Lusignan
carried off all the money with her to Bordeaux. And, just imagine, my
engagement had already been announced – to Shchevalevskaya, just three
months shy of sixteen, still in school, with a dowry of 90,000. Avdotya
Ignatyevna, do you remember how you corrupted me, fifteen years ago,
when I was still a fourteen-year-old page? …’
‘Ah, so it’s you, you scoundrel; well, at least God sent you, because
otherwise here it’s …’
‘You were wrong to suspect your merchant neighbour of smelling bad …
I just kept quiet and laughed. You see, it’s me; they buried me in a nailed
coffin.’

‘Ugh, you’re disgusting! But I’m glad all the same; you wouldn’t believe,
Klinevich, you wouldn’t believe how scarce life and wit are here.’
‘Yes, I know, yes, I know, and I’m determined to get something original
going here. Your Excellency – not you, Pervoyedov – the other one, Mr
Tarasevich, the privy councillor! Answer me! It’s Klinevich, I’m the one
who took you to see Mlle Furie during Lent. Can you hear me?’
‘I hear you, Klinevich, and I’m very glad, and believe me …’
‘I don’t believe you for a minute and don’t give a damn! I simply want to
kiss you, you dear old thing, and thank God I can’t. Do you know,
gentlemen, the trick that this grand-père came up with? He died two or
three days ago and, can you imagine, he left behind a shortfall of a total of
400,000 of public money. Funds for widows and orphans, and for some
reason he was the only one in charge, so that at the end he hadn’t been
audited for some eight years. I can just see the long faces they’re all
wearing now and how they’re remembering him! A delightful thought,
don’t you agree? I’d been marvelling for a whole year now how this
seventy-year-old geezer, who suffered from gout and rheumatism, managed
to conserve so much energy for debauchery, and – and now we have the
answer! It was the widows and orphans – the thought of them alone must
have fired him up! … I had known about it for a long time, and I was the
only one to know, Charpentier told me, and as soon as I found out, I
immediately hit him up in a friendly way during Holy Week: “Give me
25,000, or there’ll be an audit tomorrow”; and just imagine, he could only
come up with 13,000, so it seems that his dying now was very expedient.
Grand-père, grand-père, do you hear me?’
‘Chèr Klinevich, I quite agree with you, and there is no need for you …
to go into such details. Life has so much suffering and torments and so little
reward … In the end I wished finally to have some peace and, so far as I
see, I hope to glean all I can from here as well …’
‘I’ll wager that he’s already sniffed out Katish Berestova!’
‘Who? … Which Katish is that?’ the old man’s voice began to tremble
with lust.

‘Ah-ah, which Katish? The one right here, to the left, five paces from me,
ten from you. It’s already her fifth day here, and if you knew, grand-père,
what a little rascal she is … from a good family, well brought up and – a
monster, an utter monster! I didn’t show her to anybody there, I was the
only one who knew … Katish, answer me!’
‘He-he-he!’ answered in reply the cracked sound of a girl’s voice, in
which, however, one could hear something like the jab of a needle. ‘He-hehe!’
‘A little blonde girl?’ Grand-père babbled haltingly, drawing out the
three words.
‘He-he-he!’
‘I … I have long,’ babbled the old man, panting, ‘dreamed of a little
blonde girl … about fifteen years old … and precisely in circumstances like
these …’
‘Ugh, you monster!’ Avdotya Ignatyevna exclaimed.
‘Enough!’ Klinevich had made up his mind. ‘I see that there’s excellent
material. We’ll quickly arrange things for the better here. The main thing is
to spend the remaining time enjoyably; but how much time? Hey, you, the
government official, did I hear that your name was Lebezyatnikov?’
‘Lebezyatnikov, court councillor, Semyon Yevseyich, at your service, and
I’m very, very, very glad to make your acquaintance.’
‘I don’t give a damn whether you’re pleased; it’s just that it seems you
know everything here. Tell me, first of all (I’ve been wondering about this
since yesterday), how is it that we can talk here? After all, we’re dead, and
yet we can talk; and it seems that we can move as well, and yet we don’t
talk and we don’t move. What’s the secret?’
‘If you wish, Baron, Platon Nikolayevich could explain this to you better
than I.’
‘Who’s Platon Nikolayevich? Don’t shilly-shally, get to the point.’
‘Platon Nikolayevich is our local, homespun philosopher, scientist and
master of arts. He’s put out several little books on philosophy, but for the
past three months now he keeps falling sound asleep, so much so that it’s

impossible to stir him. Once a week he mutters a few words beside the
point.’
‘Get to the point, get to the point! …’
‘He explains it all by the simplest fact, namely, that up above, when we
were still alive, we mistakenly deemed death there was death. The body
comes to life here again, as it were, the residue of life is concentrated, but
only in the consciousness. I don’t know how to say it – it’s as if life
continues by inertia. Everything is concentrated, in his opinion, somewhere
in the consciousness and continues for another two or three months …
sometimes even half a year … There’s one fellow here, for example, who
has almost completely decomposed, but once every six weeks he’ll still
suddenly mutter a word, meaningless, of course, about some bobok:
“Bobok, bobok.” But that means that an inconspicuous spark of life still
glimmers inside him as well …’
‘Rather stupid. But then how is it that I smell a stench if I don’t have a
sense of smell?’
‘That’s … he-he … Well, that’s where our philosopher gets a bit hazy. It
was precisely in regard to the sense of smell that he observed that the stench
that is smelled, so to speak, is a moral stench! He-he! The stench coming
from our soul, as it were, so that in these two or three months one has time
to look back … and that this is, so to speak, the final mercy … Only it
seems to me, Baron, that this is all mystical gibberish, which is quite
excusable given his circumstances …’
‘Enough, and the rest of it, I’m sure, is all nonsense. The main thing is
that there’s two or three months of life and in the end – bobok. I propose
that we all spend these two months as pleasantly as possible and to that end
we should all arrange things on a different footing. Ladies and gentlemen! I
propose that we not be ashamed of anything!’
‘Ah, yes, let’s, let’s not be ashamed of anything!’ many voices were
heard to say, and, strangely enough, even altogether new voices were heard,
which means that meanwhile some others had only just awakened. The bass
voice of an engineer, now fully awake, thundered his assent with particular
readiness. The girl Katish giggled with delight.

‘Ah, how I want not to be ashamed of anything!’ Avdotya Ignatyevna
exclaimed with rapture.
‘Listen, now if even Avdotya Ignatyevna wants not to be ashamed of
anything …’
‘No-no-no, Klinevich, I was ashamed, all the same I was ashamed there,
but here I so terribly, terribly wish not to be ashamed of anything!’
‘I understand, Klinevich,’ the engineer bellowed, ‘that you’re proposing
to arrange life here, so to speak, on a new and rational footing.’
‘Well, I don’t give a damn about that! As far as that’s concerned, let’s
wait for Kuderyarov, who was brought here yesterday. He’ll wake up and
explain everything to you. He’s such a figure, such a gigantic figure!
Tomorrow, I believe, they’re bringing another scientist and probably
another officer, and, if I’m not mistaken in three or four days a certain
feuilletonist and, I believe, his editor as well. However, to hell with them,
we’ll have our own little group and everything will fall into place on its
own. But meanwhile I don’t want there to be any lying. That’s all I want,
because that’s the main thing. On earth it’s impossible to live and not to lie,
for life and lying are synonymous; well, but here for the fun of it we won’t
lie. The devil take it, the grave does mean something after all! We’ll all tell
our stories out loud and we won’t be ashamed of anything now. I’ll tell
about myself first. I’m a voluptuary, you know. Up there all this was bound
together with rotten ropes. Down with ropes, and let’s live these two
months in the most shameless truth! Let’s strip ourselves bare and be
naked!’
‘Let’s be naked, naked!’ the voices all cried out.
‘I so terribly, terribly want to be naked!’ Avdotya Ignatyevna squealed.
‘Ah … ah … Ah, I see that we’re going to have a good time here; I don’t
want to go see Ecke!’
‘No, I would have lived a bit longer, you know, I would have lived a bit
longer!’
‘He-he-he!’ Katish giggled.
‘The main thing is that nobody can stand in our way, and even though
Pervoyedov, I see, is angry, all the same he can’t touch me. Grand-père, do

you agree?’
‘I absolutely, absolutely agree and with the greatest pleasure, provided
only that Katish begins with her biography first.’
‘I protest, I protest with all my might,’ General Pervoyedov pronounced
firmly.
‘Your Excellency!’ the scoundrel Lebezyatnikov prattled and urged in
hurried excitement, with his voice lowered, ‘Your Excellency, it will be to
our advantage to agree. You see, there’s this girl … and, finally, all these
various little things …’
‘To be sure, there’s the girl, but …’
‘To our advantage, Your Excellency, it would really and truly be to our
advantage! Well, if only as an experiment, well, let’s at least give it a try …’
‘Even in the grave they won’t let me rest in peace!’
‘First of all, General, you’re playing preference in the grave, and
secondly, we don’t give a damn about you,’ Klinevich declaimed,
emphasizing each word.
‘My dear sir, I beg you all the same not to forget yourself.’
‘What? But you can’t touch me, while I can tease you from here, like
Yulka’s lapdog. And, first of all, gentlemen, what sort of general is he here?
It’s there he was a general, but here he’s a mere nothing!’
‘No, not a mere nothing … Here, too, I’m a …’
‘Here you’ll rot in your coffin, and the only thing left of you will be your
six brass buttons.’
‘Bravo, Klinevich, ha-ha-ha!’ the voices roared.
‘I served my sovereign … I have a sword …’
‘The only thing your sword’s good for is spearing mice; besides, you
never drew it.’
‘All the same, sir; I comprised a part of the whole.’
‘There are all sorts of parts in the whole.’
‘Bravo, Klinevich, bravo, ha-ha-ha!’
‘I don’t understand what exactly a sword is,’ the engineer exclaimed.
‘We’ll run from the Prussians like mice, they’ll tear us to pieces,’ cried a
distant and unfamiliar voice, but one literally transported with delight.

‘A sword, sir, is honour!’ the general cried, but only I heard him. A
prolonged and frenzied roar, melee and clamour broke out, and only
Avdotya Ignatyevna’s impatient squeals, which bordered on the hysterical,
could be heard.
‘But quickly, quickly! Ah, when are we going to start being ashamed of
nothing!’
‘Oh-ho-ho! Truly, my soul is passing through the torments!’ resounded
the voice of the man of the common people, and …
And that’s when I suddenly sneezed. It happened without warning and
unintentionally, but the effect was startling: everything fell as silent as the
grave, and it all vanished like a dream. A truly sepulchral silence ensued. I
don’t think that they had become ashamed on my account: after all, they’d
resolved not to be ashamed of anything! I waited for about five minutes and
– not a word, not a sound. Nor can one suppose that they feared that I
would inform on them to the police; for what could the police do here? I
can only conclude that they must after all have some secret, unknown to us
mortals, which they carefully conceal from every mortal.
‘Well, my dears,’ I thought, ‘I’ll come visit you again’, and with that I
left the cemetery.
No, this I will not tolerate; no, indeed, no! It’s not bobok that troubles me
(so that’s what this bobok turned out to be!).
Depravity in such a place, the depravity of the final hopes, the depravity
of flabby and rotting corpses and – not sparing even the final moments of
consciousness! They were granted, they were made a present of these
moments and … But most of all, most of all – in such a place! No, this I
will not tolerate …
I’ll spend some time in other classes of graves here, I’ll listen
everywhere. That’s just what needs to be done, to listen everywhere and not
just in one part, in order to come to an understanding. Perhaps I’ll stumble
on to something comforting.
But I’ll definitely go back to them. They promised their biographies and
various stories. Ugh! But I’ll go, I’ll definitely go; it’s a matter of

conscience!
I’ll take it to the Citizen; a portrait of one of the editors there was also put
in the exhibit. Perhaps he’ll publish it.
1873



